# 6.1.1 Link Aggregation
Link aggregation technology is needed that allows redundant links between devices that will not be blocked by STP. That technology is known as EtherChannel.

EtherChannel is a link aggregation technology that groups multiple physical Ethernet links together into one single logical link. It is used to provide fault-tolerance, load sharing, increased bandwidth, and redundancy, between switches, routers, and servers.

EtherChannel technology makes it possible to combine the number of physical links between the switches to increase the overall speed of switch-to-switch communication.
# 6.1.2 EtherChannel
EtherChannel technology was orginally developed by cisco as a LAN switch-to-switch technique of grouping several Fast Ethernet or Gigabit Ethernet ports into one logical channel.

# 6.1.3 Advantages of EtherChannel
- Most configuration can be done on the EtherChannel interface.
- EtherChannel relies on existing switch ports.
- Load balancing takes place between links that are part of the same EtherChannel.
- Aggregation that is seen as one logical link.
- Redundancy.
# 6.1.4 Implementation Restrictions
- Interface types cannot be mixed.
- Eight compatibly-configured Ethernet ports.
- Cisco Catalyst 2960 Layer 2 switch currently supports up to six EtherChannels.
- The individual EtherChannel group member port configuration must be consistent on both devices.
- Each EtherChannel has a logical port channel interface. A configuration applied to the port channel interface affects all physical interfaces that are assigned to that interface.
# 6.1.5 AutoNegotiation Protocols
EtherChannels can be formed through negotiation using one of two protocols:
- Port Aggregation Protocol (PAgP)
- Link Aggregation Control Protocol (LACP)
# 6.1.6 PAgP Operation
Cisco-proprietary protocol.
When EtherChannel link is configured using PAgP. PAgP packets are sent between EtherChannel-capable ports to negotiate the forming of a channel.

When enabled, PAgP also manages the EtherChannel. PAgP packets are sent every 30 seconds. PAgP checks for configuration consistency and manages link additions and failures between two switches. It ensures that when an EtherChannel is created, all ports have the same type of configuration.

PAgP helps create the EtherChannel link by detecting the configuration of each side and ensuring that links are compatible so that the EtherChannel link can be enabled when needed. The modes for PAgP as follows:
- **On** - This mode forces the interface to channel without PAgP. Interfaces configured in the on mode do not exchange PAgP packets.
- **PAgP desirable** - This PAgP mode places an interface in an active negotiating state in which the interface initiates negotiations with other interfaces by sending PAgP packets.
- **PAgP auto** - This PAgP mode places an interface in a passive negotiating state in which the interface responds to the PAgP packets that it receives but does not initiate PAgP negotiation.

The modes must be compatible on each side.

# 6.1.7 PAgP Mode Settings Example
**PAgP Modes**

| S1        | S2             | Channel Establishment |
| --------- | -------------- | --------------------- |
| On        | On             | Yes                   |
| On        | Desirable/Auto | No                    |
| Desirable | Desirable      | Yes                   |
| Desirable | Auto           | Yes                   |
| Auto      | Desirable      | Yes                   |
| Auto      | Auto           | No                    |
# 6.1.8 LACP Operation
LACP is part of an IEEE specification (802.3ad) that allows several physical ports to be bundled to form a single logical channel.
LACP allows a switch to negotiate an automatic bundle by sending LACP packets to the other switch.
LACP helps create the EtherChannel link by detecting the configuration of each side and making sure that they are compatible so that the EtherChannel link can be enabled when needed.
- **On** - This mode forces the interface to channel without LACP. Interfaces configured in the on mode do not exchange LACP packets.
- **LACP active** - This LACP mode places a port in an active negotiating state. In this state, the port initiates negotiations with other ports by sending LACP packets.
- **LACP passive** - This LACP mode places a port in a passive negotiating state. In this state, the port responds to the LACP packets that it receives but does not initiate LACP packet negotiation.
LACP allows for eight active links, and also eight standby links.
# 6.1.9 LACP Mode Settings Example


| S1      | S2             | Channel Establishment |
| ------- | -------------- | --------------------- |
| On      | On             | Yes                   |
| On      | Active/Passive | No                    |
| Active  | Active         | Yes                   |
| Active  | Passive        | Yes                   |
| Passive | Active         | Yes                   |
| Passive | Passive        | No                    |
