# 6.3.1 Verify EtherChannel
Verification command examples:

**show interfaces port-channel**
The general status of the port channel interface:
```
S1# show interfaces port-channel 1
Port-channel1 is up, line protocol is up (connected)
  Hardware is EtherChannel, address is c07b.bcc4.a981 (bia c07b.bcc4.a981)
  MTU 1500 bytes, BW 200000 Kbit/sec, DLY 100 usec,
     reliability 255/255, txload 1/255, rxload 1/255
(output omitted)
```

**show etherchannel summary**
When several port channel interfaces are configured on the same device, use the following command to display one line of information per port channel.
```
S1# show etherchannel summary
Flags:  D - down        P - bundled in port-channel
        I - stand-alone s - suspended
        H - Hot-standby (LACP only)
        R - Layer3      S - Layer2
        U - in use      N - not in use, no aggregation
        f - failed to allocate aggregator
        M - not in use, minimum links not met
        m - not in use, port not aggregated due to minimum links not met
        u - unsuitable for bundling
        w - waiting to be aggregated
        d - default port
        A - formed by Auto LAG
Number of channel-groups in use: 1
Number of aggregators:           1
Group  Port-channel  Protocol    Ports
------+-------------+-----------+-----------------------------------------------
1      Po1(SU)         LACP      Fa0/1(P)    Fa0/2(P)
```

**show etherchannel port-channel**
Display information about a specific port channel interface.

**show interfaces etherchannel**
On any physical interface member of an EtherChannel bundle, the command provide infromation about the role of the interface int he EtherChannel.

# 6.3.2 Common Issues with EtherChannel Configurations
All interfaces within an EtherChannel must have the same configuration of speed and duplex mode, native and allowed VLANs on trunks, and access VLAN on access ports.

- Assigned ports in the EtherChannel are not part of the same VLAN, or not configured as trunks. Ports with different native VLANs cannot form an EtherChannel.
- Trunking was configured on some of the ports that make up the EtherChannel, but not all of them. It is not recommended that you configure trunking mode on individual ports that make up the EtherChannel. When configuring a trunk on an EtherChannel, verify the trunking mode on the EtherChannel.
- If the allowed range of VLANs is not the same, the ports do not form an EtherChannel even when PAgP is set to the **auto** or **desirable** mode.
- The dynamic negotiation options for PAgP and LACP are not compatibly configured on both ends of the EtherChannel.