# 3.4.1 The netstat Command
The **netstat** command can be used to look for inbound or outbound connections that are not authorized.
To make this process easier, you can link the connections to the running processes that created them in Task Manager. To do this, open a command prompt with administrative privileges and enter the **netstat -abno** command, as shown in the command output.

# 3.4.2 Event Viewer
Windows Event Viewer logs the history of application, security, and system events.
Windows includes two categories of event logs: Windows Logs, and Application and Services Logs. Each of these categories has multiple log types. Events that are displayed in these logs have a level: information, warning, error, or critical. They also have the date and time that the event occurred, along with the source of the event and an ID which relates to that type of event.
It is also possible to create a custom view. This is useful when looking for certain types of events, finding events that happened during a certain time period, displaying events of a certain level, and many other criteria. There is a built-in custom view called Administrative Events that shows all critical, error, and warning events from all of the administrative logs. This is a good view to start with when trying to troubleshoot a problem.

Security event logs are found under Windows Logs. They use event IDs to identify the type of event.
# 3.4.3 Windows Update Management
Windows routinely checks the Windows Update website for high-priority updates that can help protect a computer from the latest security threats. These updates include security updates, critical updates, and service packs. Depending on the setting you choose, Windows automatically downloads and installs any high-priority updates that your computer needs or notifies you as these updates become available. To configure the settings for Windows update, search for Windows Update and click the application.
# 3.4.4 Local Security Policy
A security policy is a set of objectives that ensures the security of a network, the data, and the computer systems in an organization. The security policy is a constantly evolving document based on changes in technology, business, and employee requirements.
Windows Local Security Policy, can be used for stand-alone computers that are not part of an Active Directory domain. To open the Local Security Policy applet, search for Local Security Policy and click the program.
If the Local Security Policy on every stand-alone computer is the same, then use the Export Policy feature. Save the policy with a name, such as workstation.inf. Copy the policy file to an external media or network drive to use on other stand-alone computers. This is particularly helpful if the administrator needs to configure extensive local policies for user rights and security options.

# 3.4.5 Windows Defender
The following types of antimalware programs are available:

- **Antivirus protection** - This program continuously monitors for viruses. When a virus is detected, the user is warned, and the program attempts to quarantine or delete the virus.
- **Adware protection** - This program continuously looks for programs that display advertising on your computer.
- **Phishing protection** - This program blocks the IP addresses of known phishing websites and warns the user about suspicious sites.
- **Spyware protection** - This program scans for keyloggers and other spyware.
- **Trusted / untrusted sources** - This program warns you about unsafe programs about to be installed or unsafe websites before they are visited.

# 3.4.6 Windows Defender Firewall
To allow program access through the Windows Defender Firewall, search for **Control Panels**. Under **Systems and Security**, locate **Windows Defender Firewall**. Click **Allow an app or feature through Windows Defender Firewall**, as shown in the figure.

If you wish to use a different software firewall, you will need to disable Windows Firewall. To disable the Windows Firewall, click **Turn Windows Firewall on or off**.