# 5.2.1 Two Methods to Modify an ACL
After an ACL is configured, it may need to be modified. ACLs with multiple ACEs can be complex to configure. Sometimes the configured ACE does not yield the expected behaviors. For these reasons, ACLs may initially require a bit of trial and error to achieve the desired filtering result.
# 5.2.2 Text Editor Method
ACLs with multiple ACEs should be created in a text editor. This allows you to plan the required ACEs, create the ACL, and then paste it into the router interface.
To correct the error:

- Copy the ACL from the running configuration and paste it into the text editor.
- Make the necessary edits changes.
- Remove the previously configured ACL on the router otherwise, pasting the edited ACL commands will only append (i.e., add) to the existing ACL ACEs on the router.
- Copy and paste the edited ACL back to the router.
# 5.2.3 Sequence Numbers Method
An ACL ACE can also be deleted or added using the ACL sequence numbers. Sequence numbers are automatically assigned when an ACE is entered. These numbers are listed in the **show access-lists** command. The **show running-config** command does not display sequence numbers.
Use the **ip access-list standard** command to edit an ACL. Statements cannot be overwritten using the same sequence number as an existing statement. Therefore, the current statement must be deleted first with the **no 10** command. Then the correct ACE can be added using sequence number 10 is configured.

# 5.2.4 Modify a Named ACL Example
Named ACLs can also use sequence numbers to delete and add ACEs.

# 5.2.5 ACL Statistics
The **show access-lists** command  shows statistics for each statement that has been matched. Use the **clear access-list counters** command to clear the ACL statistics. This command can be used alone or with the number or name of a specific ACL.