# 5.3.1 The access-class Command
ACLs typically filter incoming or outgoing traffic on an interface. However, an ACL can also be used to secure remote administrative access to a device using the vty lines.

Use the following two steps to secure remote administrative access to the vty lines:

- Create an ACL to identify which administrative hosts should be allowed remote access.
- Apply the ACL to incoming traffic on the vty lines.

Use the following command to apply an ACL to the vty lines:

```
R1(config-line)# access-class {_access-list-number_ | _access-list-name_} { in | out }
```

The **in** keyword is the most commonly used option to filter incoming vty traffic. The **out** parameter filters outgoing vty traffic and is rarely applied.

The following should be considered when configuring access lists on vty lines:

- Both named and numbered access lists can be applied to vty lines.
- Identical restrictions should be set on all the vty lines, because a user can attempt to connect to any of them.
# 5.3.2 Secure VTY Access Example
```
R1(config)# username ADMIN secret class
R1(config)# ip access-list standard ADMIN-HOST
R1(config-std-nacl)# remark This ACL secures incoming vty lines
R1(config-std-nacl)# permit host 192.168.10.10
R1(config-std-nacl)# deny any
R1(config-std-nacl)# exit
R1(config)# line vty 0 4
R1(config-line)# login local
R1(config-line)# transport input telnet
R1(config-line)# access-class ADMIN-HOST in
R1(config-line)# end
R1#
```
In a production environment, you would set the vty lines to only allow SSH, as shown in the example.
```
R1(config)# line vty 0 4
R1(config-line)# login local
R1(config-line)# transport input ssh
R1(config-line)# access-class ADMIN-HOST in
R1(config-line)# end
R1#
```

# 5.3.3 Verify the VTY Port is Secured
After the ACL to restrict access to the vty lines is configured, it is important to verify that it is working as expected.
To verify the ACL statistics, issue the **show access-lists** command.