# 10.1.1 Network Attacks Today
- DDoS
- Data Breach
- Malware
# 10.1.2 Network Security Devices
**VPN-Enabled Router**
A VPN-enabled router provides a secure connection to remote users across a public network and into the enterprise network. VPN services can be integrated into the firewall.

**NGFW**
Am NGFW provides stateful packet inspection, application visibility and control, a next-generation intrusion prevention system (NGIPS), advanced malware protection (AMP), and URL filtering.

**NAC**
A Network Access Control device includes authentication, authorization, and accounting (AAA) services. In larger enterprises, these services might be incorporated into an applicance that can manage access policies across a wide variety of users and device types. The Cisco Identity Services Engine (ISE) is an example of a NAC device.

# 10.1.3 Endpoint Protection
Endpoints are best protected by a combination of NAC, host-based AMP software, an email security applicance (ESA), and a web security appliance (WSA). Advanced Malware Protection (AMP) products include endpoint solutions such as Cisco AMP for Endpoints.

# 10.1.4 Cisco Email Security Appliance
According to Talos, in June 2019, 85% of all email sent was span.
According to SANS Institute, 95% of all attacks on enterprise networks are the result of a successful spear phishing attack.

The Cisco ESA is a device that is designed to monitor SMTP.
These are some functions of the Cisco ESA:
- Block known threats.
- Remediate against stealth malware that evaded initial detection.
- Discard emails with bad links.
- Block access to newly infected sites.
- Encrypt content in outgoing email to prevent data loss.

# 10.1.5 Cisco Web Security Appliance
The WSA is a mitigation technology for web-based threats. It provides complete control over how users access the internet. Certain features and applications, such as chat, messaging, video and audio, can be allowed, restricted with time and bandwidth limits, or blocked, according to the organization's requirements. The WSA can perform blacklisting of URLs, URL-filtering, malware scanning, URL categorization, Web application filtering, and encryption and decryption of web traffic.

