# 10.2.1 Authentication with Local Password
The simplest method of remote access authentication is to configure a login and password combination on console, vty lines and aux ports.
```
R1(config)# line vty 0 4
R1(config-line)# password ci5c0
R1(config-line)# login
```

SSH ia a more secure form of remote access.
```
R1(config)# ip domain-name example.com
R1(config)# crypto key generate rsa general-keys modulus 2048
R1(config)# username Admin secret Str0g3rPa55w0rd
R1(config)# ip ssh version 2
R1(config)# line vty 0 4
R1(config-line)# transport input ssh
R1(config-line)# login local
```
The local database method has some limitations:
- User accounts must be configured locally on each device. In a large enterprise environment with multiple routers and switches to manage, it can take time to implement and change local databases on each device.
- The local database configuration provides no fallback authentication method. For example, if a admin forgets the username and password, password recovery becomes the only recovery option.
A better solution is to have all devices refer to the same database of usernames and passwords from a central server.

# 10.2.2 AAA Components
AAA stands for Authentication, Authorization and Accounting.
# 10.2.3 Authentication
**Local AAA Authentication***
Stores usernames and passwords locally in a network device such as the Cisco Routers.
**Server-Based AAA Authentication**
The router accesses a central AAA server. The AAA server contains the usernames and passwords for all users. The router uses either the Remote Authentication Dial-In User Service (RADIUS) or Terminal Access Controller Access Control System (TACACS+) protocols to communicate with the AAA server.

# 10.2.4 Authorization
Authorization governs what users can and cannot do on the network after they are authenticated.
# 10.2.5 Accounting 
AAA accounting collects and reports usage data. This data can be used for such purposes as auditing or billing. 
A primary use of accounting is to combine it with AAA authentication. The AAA server keeps a detailed log of exactly what the authenticated user does on the device.
# 10.2.6 802.1X

The IEEE 802.1X standard is a port-based access control and authentication protocol. This protocol restricts unauthorized workstations from connecting to a LAN through publicly accessible switch ports. The authentication server authenticates each workstation that is connected to a switch port before making available any services offered by the switch or the LAN.
- **Client (Supplicant)** - This is a device running 802.1X compliant client software, which is available for wired o wireless devices.
- **Switch (Authenticator)** - The switch acts as an intermediary between the client and the authentication server. It requests identifying information from the client, verifies that information with the authentication server, and relays a response to the client. Another device that could act as authenticator is a wireless access point.
- **Authentication server** - The server validates the identity of the client and notifies the switch or wireless access point that the client is or is not authorized to access the LAN and switch services.