# 10.5.2 VLAN Hopping Attacks
VLAN hopping attack enables traffic from one VLAN to be seen by another VLAN without the aid of a router. In a basic VLAN hopping attack, the threat actor configures a host to act like a switch to take advantage of the automatic trunking port feature enabled by default on most switch ports.

Th threat actor configures the host to spoof 802.1Q signalling and Cisco proprietary Dynamic Trunking Protocol (DTP) signaling to trunk with the connecting switch.
# 10.5.3 VLAN Double-Tagging Attack
A threat actor could embed a hidden 802.1q tag inside the frame that already has an 802.1q tag.
**Step 1.**
The threat actor sends a double-tagged 802.1q frame to the switch.
The outer header has the VLAN tag of the threat actor which is the same as the native VLAN of the trunk port.

**Step 2.**
The switch sees that the frame is destined to the native VLAN. The switch forwards the packet, and the frame is not retagged because it is part of the native VLAN.

**Step 3.**
The frame arrives at the second switch without the native VLAN tag. The second switch sends the frame to the inner tagged VLAN.

A VLAN double-tagging attack is unidirectional and works only when the attacker is connected to a port residing in the same VLAN as the native VLAN of the trunk port.

**Mitigation**
- Disable trunking on all access ports.
- Disable auto trunking on trunk links that trunks must be manually enabled.
- Be sure that the native VLAN is only used for trunk links.
# 10.5.5 DHCP Attacks
**DHCP Starvation Attack**
The goal of the DHCP starvation attack is to create a DoS for connecting clients. DHCP starvation attacks require an attack tool such as Gobbler.
**DHCP Spoofing Attack**
A DHCP spoofing attack occurs when a rogue DHCP server is connected to the network and provides false IP configuration parameters to legitimate clients.
# 10.5.7 ARP Attacks
A client is allowed to send an unsolicited ARP Request called a "gratuitous ARP". When a host sedns a gratuitous ARP, other hosts on the subnet store the MAC address and IPv4 address contained in the gratuitous ARP in their ARP tables.
An attacker can send gratuitous ARP messages containing a spoofed MAC address to a switch.

There are many tools available on the internet to create ARP man-in-the-middle attacks including dsniff, Cain & Abel, ettercap, Yersinia, and others.

IPv6 uses ICMPv6 Neighbor Discovery Protocol for Layer 2 address resolution. IPv6 includes strategies to mitigate Neighbor Advertisement spoofing, similar to the way IPv6 prevents a spoofed ARP Reply.

ARP spoofing and ARP poisoning are mitigated by implementing DAI.

**Step 1.**
Normal State with Converged MAC tables.
**Step 2.**
Threat actor sends two spoofed gratuitous ARP replies in an attempt to replace R1 as the default gateway.
**Step 3.**
Connected devices remove the correct entry for each other's MAC address and replace it with the attackers MAC address. The threat actor has now poisoned the ARP caches of all devices on the subnet leading to man-in-the-middle attacks.

# 10.5.8 Address Spoofing Attack
IP and MAC address spoofing can be mitigated by implementing IPSG.

# 10.5.9 STP Attack
Attacker can manipulate the STP to conduct and attack by spoofing the root bridge and changing the topology of the network. Attackers can make their hosts appear as root bridges; and therefore, capture all traffic for the immediate switched domain.

The attacker broadcasts STP bridge protocol data units (BPDUs) containing configuration and topology changes that will force spanning-tree recalculations. 

This STP attack is mitigated by implementing BPDU Guard on all access ports.

# 10.5.10 CDP Reconnaissance
The Cisco Discovery Protocol (CDP) is a proprietary Layer 2 link discovery protoco. It is enabled on all Cisco devices by default. CDP can automatically discover other CDP-enabled devices and help auto-configure their connection.

CDP information is sent out CDP-enabled ports in a periodic, unencrypted multicast. CDP information includes the IP address of the device, IOS software version, platform, capabilities, and the native VLAN.

To disable CDP globally on a device, use the **no cdp run** global configuration mode command.
To disabled CDP on a port, use the **no cdp run** interface configuration command.

Link Layer Discovery Protocol (LLDP) is also vulnerable to reconnaissance attacks. Configure **no lldp run** to disable LLDP globally. To disable LLDP on the interface, configure **no lldp transmit** and **no lldp receive**.
