Threat actors include, but are not limited to, amateurs, hacktivists, organized crime groups, state-sponsored, and terrorist groups. Threat actors are individuals or groups of individuals who perform cyberattacks. Cyberattacks are intentional malicious acts meant to negatively impact another individual or organization.
### Amateurs
Amateurs, also known as script kiddies, have little or no skill. They often use existing tools or instructions found on the internet to launch attacks. Some are just curious, while others try to demonstrate their skills by causing harm. Even though they are using basic tools, the results can still be devastating.
## Hacktivists
Hacktivists are hackers who protest against a variety of political and social ideas. Hacktivists publicly protest against organizations or governments by posting articles and videos, leaking sensitive information, and disrupting web services with illegitimate traffic in distributed denial of service (DDoS) attacks.
## Financial Gain
Much of the hacking activity that consistently threatens our security is motivated by financial gain. These cybercriminals want to gain access to our bank accounts, personal data, and anything else they can leverage to generate cash flow.
## Trade Secrets and Global Politics
In the past several years, we have heard many stories about nation states hacking other countries, or otherwise interfering with internal politics. Nation states are also interested in using cyberspace for industrial espionage. The theft of intellectual property can give a country a significant advantage in international trade.

Defending against the fallout from state-sponsored cyberespionage and cyberwarfare will continue to be a priority for cybersecurity professionals.