# 1.3.1 PII, PHI and PSI
Personally identifiable information (PII) is any information that can be used to positively identify an individual. Examples of PII include:

- Name
- Social security number
- Birthdate
- Credit card numbers
- Bank account numbers
- Government issued ID
- Address information (street, email, phone numbers)
A subset of PII is protected health information (PHI). The medical community creates and maintains electronic medical records (EMRs) that contain PHI. In the U.S., handling of PHI is regulated by the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA). In the European Union the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) protects a broad range of personal information in including health records.

Personal security information (PSI) is another type of PII. This information includes usernames, passwords, and other security-related information that individuals use to access information or services on the network.
# 1.3.2 Lost Competitive Advantage
The loss of intellectual property to competitors is a serious concern. An additional major concern is the loss of trust that comes when a company is unable to protect its customers’ personal data. The loss of competitive advantage may come from this loss of trust rather than another company or country stealing trade secrets.
# 1.3.3 Politics and National Security
It is not just businesses that get hacked. In February 2016, a hacker published the personal information of 20,000 U.S. Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) employees and 9,000 U.S. Department of Homeland Security (DHS) employees. The hacker was apparently politically motivated.

The Stuxnet worm was specifically designed to impede Iran’s progress in enriching uranium that could be used in a nuclear weapon. Stuxnet is a prime example of a network attack motivated by national security concerns.