# 27.1.1 ELK
The Elastic Stack attempts to solve this problem by providing a single interface view into a heterogenous network. The Elastic Stack consists of Elasticsearch, Logstash, and Kibana (ELK). It is a highly scalable and modular framework for ingesting, analyzing, storing and visualizing data. Elasticsearch is an open-core platform (open source in the core components) for searching and analyzing an organization’s data in near real time. It can be used in many different contexts but has gained popularity in network security as a SIEM tool. Security Onion includes ELK and other components from Elastic including:

- **Beats** - This is a series of software plugins that send different types of data to the Elasticsearch data stores.
- **ElastAlert** - This provides queries and security alerts based on user-defined criteria and other information from data in Elasticsearch. Alert notifications can be sent to a console, or email and other notification systems such as TheHive security incident response platform.
- **Curator** - This provides actions to manage Elasticsearch data indices.

Elasticsearch, which is the search engine component, uses RESTful web services and APIs, a distributed computing cluster with multiple server nodes, and a distributed NoSQL database made up of JSON documents. Additional functionality can be added through custom-created extensions. The Elasticsearch company offers a commercial extension called X-Pack which adds security, alerting, monitoring, reporting, and graphs. The company also offers a machine-learning add-on as well their own Elastic SIEM product.

Logstash enables the collection and normalization of network data into data indexes that can be efficiently searched by Elasticsearch. Logstash and Beats modules are used to ingest data into the Elasticsearch cluster.

Kibana provides a graphical interface to data that is compiled by Elasticsearch. It enables visualization of network data and provides tools and shortcuts for querying that data in order to isolate potential security breaches.

# 27.1.2 Data Reduction
Some network traffic has little value to NSM. Encrypted data, such as IPsec or SSL traffic, is largely unreadable. Some traffic, such as that generated by routing protocols or spanning-tree protocol, is routine and can be excluded. Other broadcast and multicast protocols can usually be eliminated from packet captures, as can traffic from other protocols that generate a lot of routine traffic.
# 27.1.3 Data Normalization
Data normalization is the process of combining data from a number of data sources into a common format. Logstash provides a series of transformations that process security data and transform it before adding it to Elasticsearch. Additional plugins can be created to suit the needs of the organization.

A common schema will specify the names and formats for the required data fields. Formatting of the data fields can vary widely between sources. However, if searching is to be effective, the data fields must be consistent. For example, IPv6 addresses, MAC addresses, and date and time information can be represented in varying formats. Similarly, subnet masks, DNS records, and so on can vary in format between data sources. Logstash transformations accept the data in its native format and make elements of the data consistent across all sources. For example, a single format will be used for addresses and timestamps for data from all sources.
# 27.1.4 Data Archiving
Everyone would love the security of collecting and saving everything, just in case. However, retaining NSM data indefinitely is not feasible due to storage and access issues. It should be noted that the retention period for certain types of network security information may be specified by compliance frameworks. For example, the Payment Card Industry Security Standards Council (PCI DSS) requires that an audit trail of user activities related to protected information be retained for one year.

Security Onion has different data retention periods for different types of NSM data. For pcaps and raw Bro logs, a value assigned in the **securityonion.conf** file controls the percentage of disk space that can be used by log files. By default, this value is set to 90%. For Elasticsearch, retention of data indices is controlled by Elasticsearch curator. Curator runs in a Docker container and executes every minute according to **cron** jobs. Curator logs its activity to curator.log. Curator defaults to closing indices older than 30 days. To modify this, change CURATOR_CLOSE_DAYS in /etc/nsm/securityonion.conf. As a disk reaches capacity, Curator deletes old indices to prevent your disk from filling up. To change the limit, modify LOG_SIZE_LIMIT in /etc/nsm/securityonion.conf.

Sguil alert data is retained for 30 days by default. This value is set in the **securityonion.conf** file.