# 3.1.1 VLAN Definitions
Virtual LANs (VLANs) provide segmentation and organizational flexibility in a switched network.
A group of devices within a VLAN communicate as if each device was attached to the same cable. VLANs are based on logical connections, instead of physical connections.

VLANs allow an administrator to segment networks based on factors such as function, team, or application, without regard for the physical location of the users or devices. Each VLAN is considered a separate logical network. Devices within a VLAN act as if they are in their own independent network, even if they share a common infrastructure with other VLANs. Any switch port can belong to a VLAN.

Multiple IP subnets can exist on a switched network, without the use of multiple VLANs. However, the devices will be in the same Layer 2 broadcast domain. This means that any Layer 2 broadcasts, such as an ARP request, will be received by all devices on the switched network, even by those not intended to receive the broadcast.

# 3.1.2 Benefits of a VLAN Design
Hierarchical network addressing means that IP network numbers are applied to network segments or VLANs in a way that takes the network as a whole into consideration. Blocks of contiguous network addresses are reserved for and configured on devices in a specific area of the network.

| Benefits                                   | Description                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |
| ------------------------------------------ | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| Smaller broadcast domains                  | - Dividing a network into VLANs reduces the number of devices in the broadcast domain.                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
| Improved security                          | - Only users in the same VLAN can communicate together.<br>- Only users in the same VLAN can communicate without the services of a router. The router may have a security feature such as an access control list to restrict communication between VLANs.                                  |
| Improved IT efficiency                     | - VLANs simplify network management because user with similar network requirements can be configured on the same VLAN.<br>- VLANs can be named to make them easier to identify.                                                                                                            |
| Reduced Cost                               | VLANs reduce the need for expensive network upgrades and use the existing bandwidth and uplinks more efficiently, resulting in cost savings.                                                                                                                                               |
| Better performance                         | Smaller broadcast domains reduce unnecessary traffic on the network and improve performance.                                                                                                                                                                                               |
| Simpler project and application management | - VLANs aggregate users and network devices to support business or geographic requirements.<br>- Having separate functions makes managing a project or working with a specialized application easier; an example of such an application is an e-learning development platform for faculty. |
# 3.1.3 Types of VLANs
VLANs are used for different reasons in modern networks. Some VLAN types are defined by traffic classes.

#### Default VLAN
The default VLAN on a Cisco switch is VLAN 1. Therefore, all switch ports are on VLAN 1 unless it is explicitly configured to be on another VLAN.
- All ports are assigned to VLAN 1 by default.
- The native VLAN is VLAN 1 by default.
- The management VLAN is VLAN 1 by default.
- VLAN 1 cannot be renamed or deleted.
The command **show vlan brief** output active VLANs and its associated Ports.

#### Data VLAN
Data VLANs are VLANs configured to separate user-generated traffic. They are referred to as user VLANs because they separate the network into groups of users or devices. A modern network would have many data VLANs depending on organizational requirements. Note that voice and network management traffic should not be permitted on data VLANs.

#### Native VLAN
User traffic from a VLAN must be tagged with its VLAN ID when it is sent to another switch.
Trunk ports are used between switches to support the transmission of tagged traffic. 802.1Q trunk port inserts a 4-byte tag in the frame header to identify the VLAN.

A switch may also have to send untagged traffic across a trunk link.
The 802.1Q trunk port places untagged traffic on the native VLAN. The native VLAN on a Cisco switch is VLAN 1

It is a best practice to configure the native VLAN as an unused VLAN, distinct from VLAN 1 and other VLANs. In fact, it is not unusual to dedicate a fixed VLAN to serve the role of the native VLAN for all trunk ports in the switched domain.

#### Management VLAN

A management VLAN is a data VLAN configured specifically for network management traffic including SSH, Telnet, HTTPS, HTTP, and SNMP. By default, VLAN 1 is configured as the management VLAN on a Layer 2 switch.

#### Voice VLAN
A separate VLAN is needed to support Voice over IP (VoIP). VoIP traffic requires the following:
- Assured bandwidth to ensure voice quality
- Transmission priority over other types of network traffic
- Ability to be routed around congested areas on the network
- Delay of less than 150 ms across the network
To meet these requirements, the entire network has to be designed to support VoIP.