# 3.3.1 VLAN Ranges on Catalyst Switches
The Catalyst 2960 and 3650 Series switches support over 4,000 VLANs. Normal range VLANs on these switches are numbered 1 to 1,005 and extended range VLANs are numbered 1,006 to 4,094.

**Normal Range VLANs**
- They are used in small- and medium-sized business and enterprise networks.
- They are identified by VLAN ID between 1 and 1005.
- IDs 1002 through 1005 are reserved for legacy networks. (i.e Token Ring and Fiber Distributed Data Interface).
- IDs 1 and 1002 to 1005 are automatically created and cannot be removed.
- Configurations are stored in the switch flash memory in a VLAN database file called vlan.dat.
- When configured, VLAN trunking protocol (VTP), helps synchronize the BLAN database between switches.

**Extended Range VLANs**
- They are used by service providers to service multiple customers and by enterprises large enough to need VLAN IDs.
- They are identified by a VLAN ID between 1006 and 4094.
-  Configurations are saved, by default, in the running configuration.
- They support fewer VLAN features than normal range VLANs.
- Requires VTP transparent mode configuration to support extended range VLANs.

# 3.3.2 VLAN Creation Commands
When configuring normal range VLANs, the configuration details are stored in flash memory on the switch in a file called vlan.dat.

**Enter global configuration mode, create a VLAN with a valid ID number.**
```
Switch# configure terminal
Switch(config)# vlan <vlan-id>
```
**Specify a unique name to identify the VLAN.**
```
Switch(config-vlan)# name <vlan-name>
```
# 3.3.3 VLAN Creation Example
```
S1# configure terminal
S1(config)# vlan 20
S1(config-vlan)# name student
S1(config-vlan)# end
```
**Note:** In addition to entering a single VLAN ID, a series of VLAN IDs can be entered separated by commas, or a range of VLAN IDs separated by hyphens using the **vlan** _vlan-id_ command. For example, entering the **vlan 100,102,105-107** global configuration command would create VLANs 100, 102, 105, 106, and 107.

# 3.3.4 VLAN Port Assignment Commands
The table displays the syntax for defining a port to be an access port and assigning it to a VLAN. The **switchport mode access** command is optional, but strongly recommended as a security best practice.

**Enter global configuration mode, enter interface configuration mode**
```
Switch# configure terminal
Switch(config)# interface <interface-id>
```
**Set the port to access mode.**
```
Switch(config-if)# switchport mode access
```
**Assign the port to access mode.**
```
Switch(config-if)# switchmode access vlan <vlan-id>
```

**Note:** Use the **interface range** command to simultaneously configure multiple interfaces.

# 3.3.5 VLAN Port Assignment Example
```
S1# configure terminal
S1(config)# interface fa0/6
S1(config-if)# switchport mode access
S1(config-if)# switchport access vlan 20
S1(config-if)# end
```
# 3.3.6 Data and Voice VLANs
An access port can belong to only one data VLAN at a time. However, a port can also be associated to a voice VLAN. For example, a port connected to an IP phone and an end device would be associated with two VLANs: one for voice and one for data.
# 3.3.7 Data and Voice VLAN Example
Use the **switchport voice vlan** _vlan-id_ interface configuration command to assign a voice VLAN to a port.

LANs supporting voice traffic typically also have quality of service (QoS) enabled. Voice traffic must be labeled as trusted as soon as it enters the network. Use the **mls qos trust \[cos | device cisco-phone | dscp | ip-precedence\]** interface configuration command to set the trusted state of an interface, and to indicate which fields of the packet are used to classify traffic.
```
S3(config)# vlan 20
S3(config-vlan)# name student
S3(config-vlan)# vlan 150
S3(config-vlan)# name VOICE
S3(config-vlan)# exit
S3(config)# interface fa0/18
S3(config-if)# switchport mode access
S3(config-if)# switchport access vlan 20
S3(config-if)# mls qos trust cos
S3(config-if)# switchport voice vlan 150
S3(config-if)# end
S3#
```
The **switchport access vlan** command forces the creation of a VLAN if it does not already exist on the switch. For example, VLAN 30 is not present in the **show vlan brief** output of the switch. If the **switchport access vlan 30** command is entered on any interface with no previous configuration, then the switch displays the following:
```
% Access VLAN does not exist. Creating vlan 30 
```
# 3.3.8 Verify VLAN Information
The **show vlan** command displays a list of all configured VLANs. The **show vlan** command can also be used with options. The complete syntax is **show vlan \[brief** | **id** _vlan-id_ | **name** _vlan-name_ | **summary**\].

- **brief** - Display VLAN name, status, and its ports one VLAN per line.
- **id _vlan-id_** - Display information about the identified VLAN ID number. For vlan-id, the range is 1 to 4094
- **name _vlan-name_** - Display information about the identified VLAN name. The _vlan-name_ is an ASCII string from 1 to 32 characters.
- **summary** - Display VLAN summary information.
Other useful commands are the **show interfaces** _interface-id_ **switchport** and the **show interfaces vlan** _vlan-id_ command.

# 3.3.9 Change VLAN Port Membership
If the switch access port has been incorrectly assigned to a VLAN, then simply re-enter the **switchport access vlan** _vlan-id_ interface configuration command with the correct VLAN ID.
To change the membership of a port back to the default VLAN 1, use the **no switchport access vlan** interface configuration mode.

# 3.3.10 Delete VLANs
The **no vlan** _vlan-id_ global configuration mode command is used to remove a VLAN from the switch vlan.dat file.
**Caution:** Before deleting a VLAN, reassign all member ports to a different VLAN first. Any ports that are not moved to an active VLAN are unable to communicate with other hosts after the VLAN is deleted and until they are assigned to an active VLAN.

The entire vlan.dat file can be deleted using the **delete flash:vlan.dat** privileged EXEC mode command. The abbreviated command version (**delete vlan.dat**) can be used if the vlan.dat file has not been moved from its default location. After issuing this command and reloading the switch, any previously configured VLANs are no longer present. This effectively places the switch into its factory default condition with regard to VLAN configurations.

**Note:** To restore a Catalyst switch to its factory default condition, unplug all cables except the console and power cable from the switch. Then enter the **erase startup-config** privileged EXEC mode command followed by the **delete vlan.dat** command.