# 3.5.1 Introduction to DTP
The protocol is called Dynamic Trunking Protocol (DTP), lets them automatically negotiate trunking with neighboring device.
DTP is a Cisco proprietary protocol.
The default DTP config for Catalyst 2960 and 3650 switches is dynamic auto.

To enable trunking from a Cisco switch to a device that does not support DTP, use the **switchport mode trunk** and **switchport nonegotiate** interface configuration mode commands. This causes the interface to become a trunk, but it will not generate DTP frames.
```
S1(config-if)# switchport mode trunk 
S1(config-if)# switchport nonegotiate
```
To re-enable dynamic trunking protocol:
```
S1(config-if)# switchport mode dynamic auto
```

# 3.5.2 Negotiated Interface Modes
The **switchport mode** command has additional options for negotiating the interface mode.
```
S1(config-if)# switchport mode { access | dynamic { auto | desirable } | trunk }
```
- **access**:  Puts the interface into permanent nontrunking mode and negotiates to conver the link into a nontrunk link.
- **dynamic auto**: Makes the interface able to convert the link to a trunk link. The interface becomes a trunk interface if the neighboring interface is set to  trunk or desirable mode.
- **dynamic desirable**: Makes the interface actively attempt to convert the link to a trunk link. The interface becomes a trunk interface if the neighboring interface is set to trunk, desirable or dynamic auto mode.
- **trunk**: Puts the interface into permanent trunking mode. The interface becomes a trunk interface even if the neighboring interface is not a trunk interface.
Use the **switchport nonegotiate** interface configuration command to stop DTP negotiation.
# 3.5.3 Results of a DTP Configuration

|                       | Dynamic Auto | Dynamic Desirable | Trunk                | Access               |
| --------------------- | ------------ | ----------------- | -------------------- | -------------------- |
| **Dynamic Auto**      | Access       | Trunk             | Trunk                | Access               |
| **Dynamic Desirable** | Trunk        | Trunk             | Trunk                | Access               |
| **Trunk**             | Trunk        | Trunk             | Trunk                | Limited connectivity |
| **Access**            | Access       | Access            | Limited connectivity | Access               |
# 3.5.4 Verify DTP Mode
The default DTP mode is dependent on the Cisco IOS Software version.
Issue **show stp interface** to determine the current DTP mode.