# 10.6.4 HTTP Status Codes
The HTTP server responses are identified with various status codes that inform the host application of the outcome of client requests to the server. The codes are organized into five groups. The codes are numeric, with the first number in the code indicating the type of message. The five status code groups are:

- **1xx** - Informational
- **2xx** - Success
- **3xx** - Redirection
- **4xx** - Client Error
- **5xx** - Server Error
# 10.6.5 HTTP/2
HTTP/2 is a major revision to the HTTP protocol specification. The purpose of HTTP/2 is to improve HTTP performance by addressing latency issues that existed in the HTTP 1.1 version of the protocol. HTTP/2 uses the same header format as HTTP 1.1 and uses the same status codes. However, there are many important features to HTTP/2 that a cybersecurity analyst must be aware of.
- **Multiplexing** - HTTP servers and clients carry on conversations called streams for each transaction. For example, a client will connect to an HTTP server, request resources from that server, and receive the resources it requested. With HTTP 1.1, only one stream was supported at time. With HTTP/2 a client and server can have multiple streams running between them at the same time over the same TCP connection, as shown in the figure. This provides greatly enhanced efficiency to the protocol.
- **Server PUSH** - HTTP servers are able to push content that has not yet been requested to the client. The server anticipates the content that the client is likely to request. The client caches this content for future use.
- **A binary protocol** - In HTTP 1.1, commands, such as requests from client to server, are made in text format. HTTP/2 has shifted to using binary commands. This overcomes some cumbersome issues with the former version, lowers request and response overhead, and reduces latency and improves throughput.
- **Header compression** - The HTTP request and response headers are compressed to further reduce the amount of bandwidth required by HTTP/2 streams
# 10.6.6 Securing HTTP - HTTPS
