# 15.5.1 Introduction to Ansible
Ansible is considered a tool for Infrastructure as Code (IaC). IaC is a concept in modern IT that involves managing and provisioning infrastructure through machine-readable definition files, rather than physical hardware configuration or interactive configuration commands or tools. Ansible allows you to define and manage your network and IT infrastructure through code, using simple, human-readable playbooks. This approach enables you to automate and version control your configurations, making your infrastructure setup and management more efficient, consistent, and repeatable.

Ansible is an open-source automation tool that uses a simple, human-readable language called YAML (Yet Another Markup Language) to describe automation tasks. The open-source nature of Ansible allows for a broad community of contributors who help to improve and expand its functionality.

Ansible operates in an agentless manner, which means it does not require any specialized software installed on the managed devices. This allows Ansible to operate through standard protocols like SSH.

# 15.5.2 Infrastructure as Code (IaC)
Traditionally, network administrators have used CLI (command line interface) commands to configure Cisco IOS devices. These commands are added to the **running-configuration** file of the network device.

Both Ansible and Terraform implement the principles of Infrastructure as Code (IaC), allowing you to automate the management and provisioning of infrastructure through code.

- Ansible uses YAML for its playbook format, which is very human-readable and easy to understand, organizing tasks in a simple list format.
- Terraform uses its own **_HashiCorp Configuration Language (HCL)_**, which is also designed to be human-readable. However, it is specifically structured to provision infrastructure components.
# 15.5.3 Ansible Architecture
There are three essential components that make up the Ansible architecture: **playbooks**, **modules**, and **inventory**.

- **Playbook**: written in YAML, the playbook defines a series of tasks to automate, such as configuring a network device. It includes **Plays**, which contain the variables, roles and an ordered lists of tasks. A Play can be run repeatedly. It basically consists of an implicit loop over the mapped hosts and tasks and defines how to iterate over them.
- **Modules**: These are the building blocks of tasks included in the playbook, providing specific functions like executing commands or configuring interfaces on Cisco IOS devices.
- **Inventories**: These files list the devices you want to manage, including their IP addresses and connection details.
In addition, a production instance of Ansible will have a variety of **APIs** configured and **plugins** installed to provide device connection, logging, email, and any other enhancements the network administrator wants to enable.

A typical workflow includes the following:

1. The **Admin** creates playbooks and defines the inventory of hosts.
2. **Playbooks** and **Inventories** are processed by Ansible's core, which includes **Modules**, **APIs**, and **Plugins**.
3. Ansible can optionally interact bi-directionally with external systems:
    - **Cloud Provider**: Ansible can interface with cloud services to provision, manage, and scale cloud resources such as virtual machines, storage, and networks.
    - **CMDB**: A Configuration Management Database is a repository that acts as a data warehouse for IT installations. Ansible can use the CMDB to gather detailed information about the IT environment, update configuration states, and ensure consistency across managed systems.
4. Ansible executes the defined tasks on the specified **Hosts** (routers, switches, and servers) as per the playbook instructions.

Together, these components allow you to automate and manage network configurations easily and efficiently.

# 15.5.4 Playbooks, Modules, and Inventories: A Closer Look
### **Playbooks**

Ansible playbooks ensure uniform configurations across multiple devices, reducing the risk of mistakes. Ansible can also monitor network devices. With modules like **ios_facts** for Cisco IOS, administrators can gather information on device status, interface statistics, and other important metrics. This data can be used for reports, alerts, and integration with monitoring tools.

Playbooks are YAML files that define a series of automation tasks, written in a human-readable format, specifying what actions to perform on the managed devices. For example, displaying the IPv4 addresses on a group of routers.

The following is an example of a Playbook configured to display IP addresses using the **show ip interface brief** command.

```
- name: Show IP Interface Brief on Cisco IOS routers  
  hosts: cisco_routers   
  gather_facts: no   
  tasks:
       - name: Run 'show ip interface brief' command       
         ios_command:         
             commands:           
                 - show ip interface brief       
             register: output      
                - name: Display command output       
                  debug:         
                     var: output.stdout
```

### **Inventories**

An inventory file in Ansible lists the devices (e.g., Cisco routers) to be managed. It contains the IP addresses of devices and necessary connection details such as SSH credentials and privileged EXEC passwords. This setup allows Ansible to connect to each device, execute commands, and configure settings using the specified parameters.

In Ansible, information about managed devices and configurations can be specified either in the inventory file or the playbook, depending on the use case.

The inventory file primarily contains details about the devices being managed, such as:

- IP addresses or hostnames of the devices.
- Connection details (e.g., **ansible_connection**, **ansible_user**, **ansible_password**, **ansible_become**, etc.).
Below is an example of an inventory file. In this example besides the IPv4 address of each device are its connection details such **as ansible_connection** and **ansible_network_os**.

```
[cisco_routers] 192.168.1.1 ansible_connection=network_cli ansible_network_os=ios ansible_user=your_username ansible_password=your_password ansible_become=yes ansible_become_method=enable ansible_become_password=your_enable_password  

192.168.2.1 ansible_connection=network_cli ansible_network_os=ios ansible_user=your_username ansible_password=your_password ansible_become=yes ansible_become_method=enable ansible_become_password=your_enable_password  
[cisco_switches] 
192.168.1.5 ansible_connection=network_cli ansible_network_os=ios ansible_user=your_username ansible_password=your_password ansible_become=yes ansible_become_method=enable ansible_become_password=your_enable_password  

192.168.2.5 ansible_connection=network_cli ansible_network_os=ios ansible_user=your_username ansible_password=your_password ansible_become=yes ansible_become_method=enable ansible_become_password=your_enable_password
```

# 15.5.6 Explore DevNet Learning Labs
If you want to go beyond the CCNA certification objectives, Cisco DevNet Learning Labs are a great way to explore topic related to Cisco products. Access DevNet at [https://developer.cisco.com](https://developer.cisco.com) and login.