# 6.1.1 IPv4 Private Address Space
Private IPv4 Address: 

| Class | RFC 1918 Internal Address Range | Prefix         |
| ----- | ------------------------------- | -------------- |
| A     | 10.0.0.0 - 10.255.255.255       | 10.0.0.0/8     |
| B     | 172.16.0.0 - 172.31.255.255     | 172.16.0.0/12  |
| C     | 192.168.0.0 - 192.168.255.255   | 192.168.0.0/16 |
NAT provides the translation of private addresses to public addresses.
# 6.1.2 What is NAT
Network Address Translation are configured on routers with one or more valid public IPv4 addresses. These public addresses are known as the NAT pool.
A NAT router typically operates at the border of a stub network. A stub network is one or more networks with a single connection to its neighboring network, one way in and one way out of the network.
**Note:** The connection to the ISP may use a private address or a public address that is shared among customers.

# 6.1.4 NAT Terminology
When using NAT, IPv4 addresses have different designations based on whether they are on the private network, or on the public network (internet), and whether the traffic is incoming or outgoing.
NAT includes four types of addresses:
- **Inside address** – The address of the device which is being translated by NAT.
- **Outside address** – The address of the destination device.
NAT also uses the concept of local or global with respect to addresses:
- **Local address** – A local address is any address that appears on the inside portion of the network.
- **Global address** – A global address is any address that appears on the outside portion of the network.

