# 6.2.1 Static NAT
Static NAT uses a one-to-one mapping of local and global addresses. These mappings are configured by the network administrator and remain constant.
Static NAT is particularly useful for web servers or devices that must have a consistent address that is accessible from the internet, such as a company web server. It is also useful for devices that must be accessible by authorized personnel when offsite, but not by the general public on the internet.
Static NAT requires that enough public addresses are available to satisfy the total number of simultaneous user sessions.

# 6.2.2 Dynamic NAT
Dynamic NAT uses a pool of public addresses and assigns them on a first-come, first-served basis. When an inside device requests access to an outside network, dynamic NAT assigns an available public IPv4 address from the pool.

# 6.2.3 Port Address Translation
Port Address Translation (PAT), also known as NAT overload, maps multiple private IPv4 addresses to a single public IPv4 address or a few addresses. This is what most home routers do. The ISP assigns one address to the router, yet several members of the household can simultaneously access the internet. This is the most common form of NAT for both the home and the enterprise.

PAT ensures that devices use a different TCP port number for each session with a server on the internet. When a response comes back from the server, the source port number, which becomes the destination port number on the return trip, determines to which device the router forwards the packets. The PAT process also validates that the incoming packets were requested, thus adding a degree of security to the session.

# 6.2.4 Next Available Port
PAT attempts to preserve the original source port. However, if the original source port is already used, PAT assigns the first available port number starting from the beginning of the appropriate port group 0-511, 512-1,023, or 1,024-65,535. When there are no more ports available and there is more than one external address in the address pool, PAT moves to the next address to try to allocate the original source port. This process continues until there are no more available ports or external IPv4 addresses.
When packets are returned from outside the network, if the source port number was previously modified by the NAT-enable router, the destination port number will now be changed back to the original port number by the NAT-enabled router.

# 6.2.5 NAT and PAT Comparison

| NAT                                                                                            | PAT                                                                                                     |
| ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| One-to-one mapping between Inside Local and Inside Global addresses.                           | One Inside Global address can be mapped to many Inside Local addresses.                                 |
| Uses only IPv4 addresses in translation prcess.                                                | Uses IPv4 addresses and TCP or UDP source port numbers in translation process.                          |
| A unique Inside Global address is required for each inside host accessing the outside network. | A single unique Inside Global address can be shared by many inside hosts accessing the outside network. |
# 6.2.6 Packets without a Layer 4 Segment
These packets do not contain a Layer 4 port number. PAT translates most common protocols carried by IPv4 that do not use TCP or UDP as a transport layer protocol. The most common of these is ICMPv4. Each of these types of protocols is handled differently by PAT. For example, ICMPv4 query messages, echo requests, and echo replies include a Query ID. ICMPv4 uses the Query ID to identify an echo request with its corresponding echo reply. The Query ID is incremented with each echo request sent. PAT uses the Query ID instead of a Layer 4 port number.