# 5.1.1 Redundancy in Layer 2 Switched Networks
Redundancy is important for eliminating single points of failure and preventing disruption of network services.
Ethernet LANs require a loop-free topology with a single path between any two devices. a loop in an Ethernet LAN can cause continued propagation of Ethernet frames until a links is disrupted and breaks the loop.
# 5.1.2 Spanning Tree Protocol
STP is a loop-prevential network protocol that allows for redundancy while creating a loop-free Layer 2 topology. IEEE 802.1D is the original IEEE MAC Bridging standard for STP.
# 5.1.3 STP Recalculation
When a redundant link is down STP makes sure to use the before blocked link and forward new packets through it, thus, not interrupting network operations.
# 5.1.4 Issues with Redundant Switch Links 
Path redundancy provides multiple network services by eliminating the possibility of a single point of failure.

When multiple paths exists between two devices and there is no STP, a Layer 2 loop occurs.

A Layer 2 loop can result in MAC address table instability, link, saturation, and high CPU utilization on switches and end-devices, resulting in the network becoming unusable.

Unlike Layer 3 protocols, Layer 2 does not include a mechanism to recognize and eliminate endless looping frames.
# 5.1.5 Layer 2 Loops
Layer 2 loops can cause broadcast, multicast and unknown unicast frames to loop endlessly.
# 5.1.6 Broadcast Storm
Is a abnormally high number of broadcast overwhelming the network.
# 5.1.7 The Spanning Tree Algorithm
Invented by Radia Perlman and published in the 1985 paper "An Algorithm for Distributed Computation of a Spanning Tree in an Extended LAN". Her spannig tree algorithm (STA) creates a loop-free topology by selecting a single root bridge where all other switches determine a single least-cost path.

**Select the Root Bridge**
The spanning tree algorithm begins by selecting a single root bridge.
**Block Redundant Paths**
STP ensures that there is only one logical path between all destination on the network by intentionally blocking redundant paths that could cause a loop.
**Loop-Free Topology**
A blocked port has the effect o making that link a non-forwarding link between the switches,.
**Link Failure Causes Recalculation**
STP recalculates the paths and unblocks the necessary ports to allow the redundant path to become active.