# 2.1.2 Router Configuration Mode for OSPF
OSPFv2 is enabled using the `router ospf {process-id}` global configuration mode command.
The _process-id_ value representes a number between 1 and 65525 and is selected by the network administrator. The _process-id_ value is locally significant, which means that it does not have to be same value on the other OSPF routers to establish adjacencies. It is considered best practice to use the same _process-id_ on all OSPF routers.
```
R1(config)# router ospf 10
R1(config-router)#
```
# 2.1.3 Router IDs
As OSPF router ID is a 32-bit value, represented as an IPv4 address. The router ID is used to uniquely identify an OSPF router. 
All OSPF packets include the router ID of the originating router.
Every router requires a router ID to participate in an OSPF domain. The router ID can be defined by an administrator or automatically assigned by the router. 
The router ID is used by an OSPF_enabled router to do the following:
- **Participate in the synchronization of OSPF databases** - During the Exchange State, the router with the highest router ID will send their database descriptor (DBD) packets first.
- **Participate in the election of the designated router (DR)** - In a multiaccess LAN environment, the router with the highest router ID is elected the Dr. The routing device with the second highest router ID is elected the backup designated router (BDR).

# 2.1.4 Router ID Order of Precedence
1. The router ID is configured using the OSPF `router-id <rid>` router configuration mode command. The _rid_ value is any 32-bit value expressed as an IPv4 address. This is the recommended method.
2. If the router ID is not explicitly configured, the router chooses the highest active IPv4 address of any configured loopback interfaces.
3. If no loopback interfaces are configured, then the router chooses the highest active IPv4 address of any of its interfaces. Least recommended because it makes more difficult to distinguish between specific routers.
# 2.1.5 Configure a Loopback Interface as the Router ID
```
R1(config-if)# interface Loopback 1
R1(config-if)# ip address 1.1.1.1 255.255.255.255
R1(config-if)# end
R1# show ip protocols | include Router ID
	Router ID 1.1.1.1
R1#
```

# 2.1.6 Explicitly Configure a Router ID
```
R1(config)# router ospf 10
R1(config-router)# router-id 1.1.1.1
R1(config-router)# end
*May 23 19:33:42.689: %SYS-5-CONFIG_I: Configured from console by console
R1# show ip protocols | include Router ID
	Router ID 1.1.1.1
R1#
```
# 2.1.7 Modify a Router ID
After a router selects a router ID, an active OSPF router does not allow the router ID to be changed until the router is reloaded or the OSPF process is reset.
Notice how an informational message appears stating that the OSPF process must be cleared or that the router must be reloaded. The reason is because R1 already has adjacencies with other neighbors using the router ID 10.10.1.1. Those adjacencies must be renegotiated using the new router ID 1.1.1.1.

```
R1# show ip protocols | include Router ID
Router ID 10.10.1.1
R1# conf t
Enter configuration commands, one per line.  End with CNTL/Z.
R1(config)# router ospf 10 
R1(config-router)# router-id 1.1.1.1
% OSPF: Reload or use "clear ip ospf process" command, for this to take effect
R1(config-router)# end
R1# clear ip ospf process
Reset ALL OSPF processes? [no]: y
*Jun  6 01:09:46.975: %OSPF-5-ADJCHG: Process 10, Nbr 3.3.3.3 on GigabitEthernet0/0/1 from FULL to DOWN, Neighbor Down: Interface down or detached
*Jun  6 01:09:46.975: %OSPF-5-ADJCHG: Process 10, Nbr 2.2.2.2 on GigabitEthernet0/0/0 from FULL to DOWN, Neighbor Down: Interface down or detached
*Jun  6 01:09:46.981: %OSPF-5-ADJCHG: Process 10, Nbr 3.3.3.3 on GigabitEthernet0/0/1 from LOADING to FULL, Loading Done
*Jun  6 01:09:46.981: %OSPF-5-ADJCHG: Process 10, Nbr 2.2.2.2 on GigabitEthernet0/0/0 from LOADING to FULL, Loading Done
R1# show ip protocols | include Router ID
Router ID 1.1.1.1
R1#
```
