# 2.2.1 The network Command Syntax
One type of network classified by OSPF is point-to-point network. You can specify the interfaces that belong to a point-to-point network by configuring the `network` command. You can also configure OSPF directly on the interface with the `ip ospf` command, as we will see later.

```
Router(config-router)# network {network-address} {wildcard-mask} area {area-id}
```
The _network-address wildcard-mask_ syntax is used to enable OSPF on interfaces. Any interfaces on a router that match the network address in the **network** command are enabled to send and receive OSPF packets.
The **area** _area-id_ syntax refers to the OSPF area. When configuring single-area OSPFv2, the **network** command must be configured with the same _area-id_ value on all routers. Although any area ID can be used, it is good practice to use an area ID of 0 with single-area OSPFv2. This convention makes it easier if the network is later altered to support multiarea OSPFv2.

# 2.2.2 The Wildcard Mask
The wildcard mask is typically the inverse of the subnet mask configured on that interface. In a subnet mask, binary 1 is equal to a match and binary 0 is not a match. In a wildcard mask the reverse is true. 
The easiest way to calculate a wildcard mask is to subtract the network subnet mask from 255.255.255.255.

$$ 255.255.255.255 - 255.255.255.000 = 0.0.0.255 $$
$$ 255.255.255.255 - 255.255.255.192 = 0.0.0.63 $$
# 2.2.4 Configure OSPF Using the network Command
```
R1(config)# router ospf 10
R1(config-router)# network 10.10.1.0 0.0.0.255 area 0
R1(config-router)# network 10.1.1.4 0.0.0.3 area 0
R1(config-router)# network 10.1.1.12 0.0.0.3 area 0
R1(config-router)#
```
As an alternative, the second example shows how OSPFv2 can be enabled by specifying the exact interface IPv4 address using a quad zero wildcard mask.
```
R1(config)# router ospf 10
R1(config-router)# network 10.10.1.1 0.0.0.0 area 0
R1(config-router)# network 10.1.1.5 0.0.0.0 area 0
R1(config-router)# network 10.1.1.14 0.0.0.0 area 0
R1(config-router)#
```
The advantage of specifying the interface is that the wildcard mask calculation is not necessary. Notice that in all cases, the **area** argument specifies area 0.

# 2.2.6 Configure OSPF Using the ip ospf Command
You can also configure OSPF directly on the interface instead of using the `network` command. To configure OSPF directly on the interface, use the `ip ospf` interface configuration mode command.
```
Router(config-if)# ip ospf {proccess-id} area {area-id}
```
# 2.2.8 Passive Interface
By default, OSPF messages are forwarded out all OSPF-enabled interfaces. However, these messages really only need to be sent out interfaces that are connecting to other OSPF-enabled routers.

Sending out unneeded messages on a LAN affects the network in three ways, as follows:

- **Inefficient Use of Bandwidth** - Available bandwidth is consumed transporting unnecessary messages.
- **Inefficient Use of Resources** - All devices on the LAN must process and eventually discard the message.
- **Increased Security Risk** - Without additional OSPF security configurations, OSPF messages can be intercepted with packet sniffing software. Routing updates can be modified and sent back to the router, corrupting the routing table with false metrics that misdirect traffic.
# 2.2.9 Configure Passive Interfaces
Use the `passive-interface` router configuration mode command to prevent the transmission of routing messages through a router interface, but still allow that network to be advertised to other routers.

```
R1(config)# router ospf 10
R1(config-router)# passive-interface loopback 0
R1(config-router)# end
R1#
```
As an alternative, all interfaces can be made passive using the **passive-interface default** command.
# 2.2.11 OSPF Point-to-Point Networks
By default, Cisco routers elect a DR and BDR on Ethernet interfaces, even if there is only one other device on the link. You can verify this with the **show ip ospf interface** command.

R1 is the BDR and R2 is the DR. The DR/ BDR election process is unnecessary as there can only be two routers on the point-to-point network between R1 and R2.

Notice in the output that the router has designated the network type as BROADCAST. To change this to a point-to-point network, use the interface configuration command **ip ospf network point-to-point** on all interfaces where you want to disable the DR/BDR election process.

```
R1(config)# interface GigabitEthernet 0/0/0
R1(config-if)# ip ospf network point-to-point
*Jun  6 00:44:05.208: %OSPF-5-ADJCHG: Process 10, Nbr 2.2.2.2 on GigabitEthernet0/0/0 from FULL to DOWN, Neighbor Down: Interface down or detached
*Jun  6 00:44:05.211: %OSPF-5-ADJCHG: Process 10, Nbr 2.2.2.2 on GigabitEthernet0/0/0 from LOADING to FULL, Loading Done
R1(config-if)# interface GigabitEthernet 0/0/1
R1(config-if)# ip ospf network point-to-point 
*Jun  6 00:44:45.532: %OSPF-5-ADJCHG: Process 10, Nbr 3.3.3.3 on GigabitEthernet0/0/1 from FULL to DOWN, Neighbor Down: Interface down or detached
*Jun  6 00:44:45.535: %OSPF-5-ADJCHG: Process 10, Nbr 3.3.3.3 on GigabitEthernet0/0/1 from LOADING to FULL, Loading Done
R1(config-if)# end
R1# show ip ospf interface GigabitEthernet 0/0/0
```

# 2.2.12 Loopbacks and Point-to-Point Networks
