# 2.3.1 OSPF Network Types
Another type of network that uses OSPF is the multiaccess OSPF network. Multiaccess OSPF networks are unique in that one router controls the distribution of LSAs. The router that is elected for this role should be determined by the network administrator through proper configuration.
OSPF may include additional processes depending on the type of network. Point-to-point are links between routers. Router can also be connected to the same switch to form a multiaccess network.
# 2.3.2 OSPF Designated Router
Recall that, in multiaccess networks, OSPF elects a DR and BDR as a solution to manage the number of adjacencies and the flooding of link-state advertisements (LSAs). The DR is responsible for collecting and distributing LSAs sent and received. The DR uses the multicast IPv4 address 224.0.0.5 which is meant for all OSPF routers.

A BDR is also elected in case the DR fails. The BDR listens passively and maintains a relationship with all the routers. If the DR stops producing Hello packets, the BDR promotes itself and assumes the role of DR.

All other routers become a DROTHER (a router that is neither the DR nor the BDR). DROTHERs use the multiaccess address 224.0.0.6 (all designated routers) to send OSPF packets to the DR and BDR. Only the DR and BDR listen for 224.0.0.6.

# 2.3.4 Verify OSPF Router Roles

**R1 DROTHER**
```
R1# show ip ospf interface GigabitEthernet 0/0/0
[...]
  Transmit Delay is 1 sec, State DROTHER, Priority 1
  Designated Router (ID) 3.3.3.3, Interface address 192.168.1.3
  Backup Designated router (ID) 2.2.2.2, Interface address 192.168.1.2
[...]
Neighbor Count is 2, Adjacent neighbor count is 2 
    Adjacent with neighbor 2.2.2.2  (Backup Designated Router)
    Adjacent with neighbor 3.3.3.3  (Designated Router)
[...]
```
**R2 BDR**
```
R2# show ip ospf interface GigabitEthernet 0/0/0
[...]
  Transmit Delay is 1 sec, State BDR, Priority 1
  Designated Router (ID) 3.3.3.3, Interface address 192.168.1.3
  Backup Designated router (ID) 2.2.2.2, Interface address 192.168.1.2
[...]
Neighbor Count is 2, Adjacent neighbor count is 2 
    Adjacent with neighbor 1.1.1.1
    Adjacent with neighbor 3.3.3.3  (Designated Router)
[...]
```
**R3 DR**
```
R3# show ip ospf interface GigabitEthernet 0/0/0
[...]
  Transmit Delay is 1 sec, State DR, Priority 1
  Designated Router (ID) 3.3.3.3, Interface address 192.168.1.3
  Backup Designated router (ID) 2.2.2.2, Interface address 192.168.1.2
[...]
Neighbor Count is 2, Adjacent neighbor count is 2 
    Adjacent with neighbor 1.1.1.1
    Adjacent with neighbor 2.2.2.2  (Backup Designated Router)
[...]
```
# 2.3.5 Verify DR/BDR Adjacencies
To verify the OSPFv2 adjacencies, use the **show ip ospf neighbor** command, as shown in the example for R1. The state of neighbors in multiaccess networks can be as follows:

- **FULL/DROTHER** - This is a DR or BDR router that is fully adjacent with a non-DR or BDR router. These two neighbors can exchange Hello packets, updates, queries, replies, and acknowledgments.
- **FULL/DR** - The router is fully adjacent with the indicated DR neighbor. These two neighbors can exchange Hello packets, updates, queries, replies, and acknowledgments.
- **FULL/BDR** - The router is fully adjacent with the indicated BDR neighbor. These two neighbors can exchange Hello packets, updates, queries, replies, and acknowledgments.
- **2-WAY/DROTHER** - The non-DR or BDR router has a neighbor relationship with another non-DR or BDR router. These two neighbors exchange Hello packets.
The normal state for an OSPF router is usually FULL. If a router is stuck in another state, it is an indication that there are problems in forming adjacencies. The only exception to this is the 2-WAY state, which is normal in a multiaccess broadcast network.
```
Router# show ip ospf neighbor 
```
# 2.3.6 Default DR/BDR Election Process

The OSPF DR and BDR election decision is based on the following criteria, in sequential order:

1. The routers in the network elect the router with the highest interface priority as the DR. The router with the second highest interface priority is elected as the BDR. The priority can be configured to be any number between 0 - 255. If the interface priority value is set to 0, that interface cannot be elected as DR nor BDR. The default priority of multiaccess broadcast interfaces is 1. Therefore, unless otherwise configured, all routers have an equal priority value and must rely on another tie breaking method during the DR/BDR election.
2. If the interface priorities are equal, then the router with the highest router ID is elected the DR. The router with the second highest router ID is the BDR.

Recall that the router ID is determined in one of the following three ways:

1. The router ID can be manually configured.
2. If no router IDs are configured, the router ID is determined by the highest loopback IPv4 address.
3. If no loopback interfaces are configured, the router ID is determined by the highest active IPv4 address.

OSPF DR and BDR elections are not pre-emptive. If a new router with a higher priority or higher router ID is added to the network after the DR and BDR election, the newly added router does not take over the DR or the BDR role. This is because those roles have already been assigned. The addition of a new router does not initiate a new election process.
# 2.3.7 DR Failure and Recovery
After the DR is elected, it remains the DR until one of the following events occurs:

- The DR fails.
- The OSPF process on the DR fails or is stopped.
- The multiaccess interface on the DR fails or is shutdown.

If the DR fails, the BDR is automatically promoted to DR. This is the case even if another DROTHER with a higher priority or router ID is added to the network after the initial DR/BDR election. However, after a BDR is promoted to DR, a new BDR election occurs and the DROTHER with the highest priority or router ID is elected as the new BDR.

# 2.3.8 The ip ospf priority Command
Instead of relying on the router ID, it is better to control the election by setting interface priorities. This also allows a router to be the DR in one network and a DROTHER in another. To set the priority of an interface, use the command **ip ospf priority** _value_, where value is 0 to 255. A value of 0 does not become a DR or a BDR. A value of 1 to 255 on the interface makes it more likely that the router becomes the DR or the BDR.

# 2.3.9 Configure OSPF Priority
```
R1(config)# interface GigabitEthernet 0/0/0 
R1(config-if)# ip ospf priority 255 
R1(config-if)# end 
R1#
```
The **clear ip ospf process** command also must be entered.
```
R1# show ip ospf interface GigabitEthernet 0/0/0
[...]
Transmit Delay is 1 sec, State DR, Priority 255
[...]
```
