# 2.4.1 Cisco OSPF Cost Metric
Recall that a routing protocol uses a metric to determine the best path of a packet across a network. A metric gives indication of the overhead that is required to send packets across a certain interface. OSPF uses cost as a metric. A lower cost indicates a better path than a higher cost.

The Cisco cost of an interface is inversely proportional to the bandwidth of the interface. Therefore, a higher bandwidth indicates a lower cost. The formula used to calculate the OSPF cost is:

**Cost = reference bandwidth / interface bandwidth**

The default reference bandwidth is 108 (100,000,000); therefore, the formula is:

**Cost = 100,000,000 bps / interface bandwidth in bps**

Because the OSPF cost value must be an integer, FastEthernet, Gigabit Ethernet, and 10 Gigabit Ethernet (10 GigE) interfaces share the same cost. To correct this situation, you can:

- Adjust the reference bandwidth with the **auto-cost reference-bandwidth** command on each OSPF router.
- Manually set the OSPF cost value with the **ip ospf cost** command on necessary interfaces.

| Interface Type           | Reference Bandwidth in bps | Default Bandwidth in bps | Cost     |
| ------------------------ | -------------------------- | ------------------------ | -------- |
| 10 Gigabit Ethernet      | 100,000,000 /              | 10,000,000,000           | 0.01 = 1 |
| Gigabit Ethernet         | 100,000,000                | 1,000,000,000            | 0.1 = 1  |
| Fast Ethernet (100 Mbps) | 100,000,000                | 100,000,000              | 1        |
| Ethernet (10 Mbps)       | 100,000,00                 | 10,000,000               | 10       |
# 2.4.2 Adjust the Reference Bandwidth
The cost value must be an integer. If something less than an integer is calculated, OSPF rounds up to the nearest integer. Therefore, the OSPF cost assigned to a Gigabit Ethernet interface with the default reference bandwidth of 100,000,000 bps would equal 1, because the nearest integer for 0.1 is 0 instead of 1.

For this reason, all interfaces faster than Fast Ethernet will have the same cost value of 1 as a Fast Ethernet interface. To assist OSPF in making the correct path determination, the reference bandwidth must be changed to a higher value to accommodate networks with links faster than 100 Mbps.

Changing the reference bandwidth does not actually affect the bandwidth capacity on the link; rather, it simply affects the calculation used to determine the metric. To adjust the reference bandwidth, use the **auto-cost reference-bandwidth** _Mbps_ router configuration command.

```
Router(config-router)# auto-cost reference-bandwidth Mbps
```

This command must be configured on every router in the OSPF domain. Notice that the value is expressed in Mbps; therefore, to adjust the costs for Gigabit Ethernet, use the command **auto-cost reference-bandwidth 1000**. For 10 Gigabit Ethernet, use the command **auto-cost reference-bandwidth 10000**.

To return to the default reference bandwidth, use the **auto-cost reference-bandwidth 100** command.

**Note:** The **auto-cost reference-bandwidth** command must be configured consistently on all routers in the OSPF domain to ensure accurate route calculations.
# 2.4.3 OSPF Accumulates Costs
The cost of an OSPF route is the accumulated value from one router to the destination network.

For example, the total cost for R1 to reach the 10.10.2.0/24 network is 11. This is because the link to R2 cost = 10 and the R2's loopback default cost = 1. 10 + 1 = 11.

```
R1# show ip route | include 10.10.2.0
O        10.10.2.0/24 [110/11] via 10.1.1.6, 01:05:02, GigabitEthernet0/0/0
R1# show ip route 10.10.2.0
Routing entry for 10.10.2.0/24
  Known via "ospf 10", distance 110, metric 11, type intra area  
  Last update from 10.1.1.6 on GigabitEthernet0/0/0, 01:05:13 ago  
  Routing Descriptor Blocks:  
  * 10.1.1.6, from 2.2.2.2, 01:05:13 ago, via GigabitEthernet0/0/0
          Route metric is 11, traffic share count is 1
 R1#
```
# 2.4.4 Manually Set OSPF Cost Value
OSPF cost values can be manipulated to influence the route chosen by OSPF.
**Note:** Changing the cost of link may have undesired consequences. Therefore, adjusting interface cost values should only be configured when the outcome is fully understood.
```
R1(config)# interface g0/0/1
R1(config-if)# ip ospf cost 30
R1(config-if)# interface lo0
R1(config-if)# ip ospf cost 10
R1(config-if)# end
R1#
```

**Note:** Although using the **ip ospf cost** command is the recommended method to manipulate the OSPF cost values, an administrator could also do this by using the interface configuration **bandwidth** _kbps_ command. However, that would only work if all the routers are Cisco routers.

# 2.4.5 Test Failover to Backup Route
What happens if the link between R1 and R2 goes down? We can simulate that by shutting down the Gigabit Ethernet 0/0/0 interface and verifying the routing table is updated to use R3 as the next-hop router.

# 2.4.7 Hello Packet Intervals
OSPFv2 Hello packets are transmitted to multicast address 224.0.0.5 (all OSPF routers) every 10 seconds. This is the default timer value on multiaccess and point-to-point networks.

**Note:** Hello packets are not sent on the simulated the LAN interfaces because those interfaces were set to passive by using the router configuration **passive-interface** command.

The Dead interval is the period that the router waits to receive a Hello packet before declaring the neighbor down. If the Dead interval expires before the routers receive a Hello packet, OSPF removes that neighbor from its link-state database (LSDB). The router floods the LSDB with information about the down neighbor out all OSPF-enabled interfaces. Cisco uses a default of 4 times the Hello interval. This is 40 seconds on multiaccess and point-to-point networks.

**Note:** On non-broadcast multiaccess (NBMA) networks, the default Hello interval is 30 seconds and the default dead interval is 120 seconds. NBMA networks are beyond the scope of this module.

# 2.4.8 Verify Hello and Dead Intervals
The OSPF Hello and Dead intervals are configurable on a per-interface basis. The OSPF intervals must match or a neighbor adjacency does not occur. To verify the currently configured OSPFv2 interface intervals, use the **show ip ospf interface** command.

Use the **show ip ospf neighbor** command to see the Dead Time counting down from 40 second.

# 2.4.9 Modify OSPFv2 Intervals
It may be desirable to change the OSPF timers so that routers detect network failures in less time. Doing this increases traffic, but sometimes the need for quick convergence is more important than the extra traffic it creates.

**Note:** The default Hello and Dead intervals are based on best practices and should only be altered in rare situations.

OSPFv2 Hello and Dead intervals can be modified manually using the following interface configuration mode commands:

```
Router(config-if)# ip ospf hello-interval seconds
```

```
Router(config-if)# ip ospf dead-interval seconds
```

Use the **no ip ospf hello-interval** and **no ip ospf dead-interval** commands to reset the intervals to their default.