# 2.6.1 Verify OSPF Neighbors
If you have configured single-area OSPFv2, you will need to verify your configurations. This topic details the many commands that you can use to verify OSPF.

As you know, the following two commands are particularly useful for verifying routing:

- `show ip interface brief` - This verifies that the desired interfaces are active with correct IP addressing.
- `show ip route`- This verifies that the routing table contains all the expected routes.

Additional commands for determining that OSPF is operating as expected include the following:

- `show ip ospf neighbor`
- `show ip protocols`
- `show ip ospf`
- `show ip ospf interface`
- `show ip route ospf

Use the `show ip ospf neighbor` command to verify that the router has formed an adjacency with its neighboring routers. If the router ID of the neighboring router is not displayed, or if it does not show as being in a state of FULL, the two routers have not formed an OSPFv2 adjacency.

If two routers do not establish adjacency, link-state information is not exchanged. Incomplete LSDBs can cause inaccurate SPF trees and routing tables. Routes to destination networks may not exist, or may not be the most optimum path.

**Note:** A non-DR or BDR router that has a neighbor relationship with another non-DR or BDR router will display a two-way adjacency instead of full.

For each neighbor, this command displays the following:

- **Neighbor ID** - This is the router ID of the neighboring router.
- **Pri** - This is the OSPFv2 priority of the interface. This value is used in the DR and BDR election.
- **State** - This is the OSPFv2 state of the interface. FULL state means that the router and its neighbor have identical OSPFv2 LSDBs. On multiaccess networks, such as Ethernet, two routers that are adjacent may have their states displayed as 2WAY. The dash indicates that no DR or BDR is required because of the network type.
- **Dead Time** - This is the amount of time remaining that the router waits to receive an OSPFv2 Hello packet from the neighbor before declaring the neighbor down. This value is reset when the interface receives a Hello packet.
- **Address** - This is the IPv4 address of the interface of the neighbor to which this router is directly connected.
- **Interface** - This is the interface on which this router has formed adjacency with the neighbor.

Two routers may not form an OSPFv2 adjacency if the following occurs:

- The subnet masks do not match, causing the routers to be on separate networks.
- The OSPFv2 Hello or Dead Timers do not match.
- The OSPFv2 Network Types do not match.
- There is a missing or incorrect OSPFv2 network command.
# 2.6.2 Verify OSPF Protocol Settings
The `show ip protocols` command is a quick way to verify vital OSPF configuration information. This includes the OSPFv2 process ID, the router ID, interfaces explicitly configured to advertise OSPF routes, the neighbors the router is receiving updates from, and the default administrative distance.

# 2.6.3 Verify OSPF Process Information
The `show ip ospf` command can also be used to examine the OSPFv2 process ID and router ID. This command displays the OSPFv2 area information and the last time the SPF algorithm was executed.

# 2.6.4 Verify OSPF Interface Settings
The `show ip ospf interface` command provides a detailed list for every OSPFv2-enabled interface. Specify an interface to display the settings of just that interface. This command shows the process ID, the local router ID, the type of network, OSPF cost, DR and BDR information on multiaccess links (not shown), and adjacent neighbors.

To get a quick summary of OSPFv2-enabled interfaces, use the `show ip ospf interface brief` command. This command is useful for seeing important information including the following:

- Interfaces are participating in OSPF
- Networks that are being advertised (IP Address/Mask)
- Cost of each link
- Network state
- Number of neighbors on each link