# 9.2.2 Network Traffic Trends
More recently, video traffic has become the increasingly important to business communications and operations. According to the Cisco Visual Networking Index (VNI), video traffic represented 70% of all traffic in 2017. By 2022, video will represent 82% of all traffic. In addition, mobile video traffic will reach 60.9 exabytes per month by 2022, up from 6.8 exabytes per month in 2017.The type of demands that voice, video, and data traffic place on the network are very different.
# 9.2.3 Voice
Voice traffic is predictable and smooth. However, voice is very sensitive to delays and dropped packets. It makes no sense to re-transmit voice if packets are lost; therefore, voice packets must receive a higher priority than other types of traffic. For example, Cisco products use the RTP port range 16384 to 32767 to prioritize voice traffic. Voice can tolerate a certain amount of latency, jitter, and loss without any noticeable effects. Latency should be no more than 150 milliseconds (ms). Jitter should be no more than 30 ms, and voice packet loss should be no more than 1%. Voice traffic requires at least 30 Kbps of bandwidth. The table gives a summary of voice traffic characteristics and requirements.

|Voice Traffic Characteristics|One-Way Requirements|
|---|---|
|- Smooth<br>- Benign<br>- Drop sensitive<br>- Delay sensitive<br>- UDP priority|- Latency ≤ 150ms<br>- Jitter ≤ 30ms<br>- Loss ≤ 1% Bandwidth (30 – 128 Kbps)|

# 9.2.4 Video
Video traffic tends to be unpredictable, inconsistent, and bursty compared to voice traffic. Compared to voice, video is less resilient to loss and has a higher volume of data per packet
UDP ports such as 554, are used for the Real-Time Streaming Protocol (RSTP) and should be given priority over other, less delay-sensitive, network traffic. Similar to voice, video can tolerate a certain amount of latency, jitter, and loss without any noticeable effects. Latency should be no more than 400 milliseconds (ms). Jitter should be no more than 50 ms, and video packet loss should be no more than 1%. Video traffic requires at least 384 Kbps of bandwidth. The table gives a summary of video traffic characteristics and requirements.

|Video Traffic Characteristics|One-Way Requirements|
|---|---|
|- Bursty<br>- Greedy<br>- Drop sensitive<br>- Delay sensitive<br>- UDP priority|- Latency ≤ 200-400 ms<br>- Jitter ≤ 30-50 ms<br>- Loss ≤ 0.1**–**1%<br>- Bandwidth (384 Kbps – > 20 Mbps|
# 9.2.5 Data
Most applications use either TCP or UDP. Unlike UDP, TCP performs error recovery. Data applications that have no tolerance for data loss, such as email and web pages, use TCP to ensure that, if packets are lost in transit, they will be resent. Data traffic can be smooth or bursty. Network control traffic is usually smooth and predictable. When there is a topology change, the network control traffic may burst for a few seconds. But the capacity of today’s networks can easily handle the increase in network control traffic as the network converges.

However, some TCP applications can consume a large portion of network capacity. FTP will consume as much bandwidth as it can get when you download a large file, such as a movie or game. The table summarizes data traffic characteristics.

|Data Traffic Characteristics|
|---|
|- Smooth/bursty<br>- Benign/greedy<br>- Drop insensitive<br>- Delay insensitive<br>- TCP retransmits|
A network administrator still needs to consider the quality of the user experience, sometimes referred to as Quality of Experience or QoE. There are two main factors that a network administrator needs to ask about the flow of data traffic:

- Does the data come from an interactive application?
- Is the data mission critical?
**Factors to Consider for Data Delay**

| **Factor**      | **Mission Critical**                                                                              | **Not Mission Critical**                                                                      |
| --------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Interactive     | Prioritize for the lowest delay of all data traffic and strive for a 1 to 2 second response time. | Applications could benefit from lower delay.                                                  |
| Not interactive | Delay can vary greatly as long as the necessary minimum bandwidth is supplied.                    | Gets any leftover bandwidth after all voice, video, and other data application needs are met. |