A number of queuing algorithms are available. For the purposes of this course, we will focus on the following:

- First-In, First-Out (FIFO)
- Weighted Fair Queuing (WFQ)
- Class-Based Weighted Fair Queuing (CBWFQ)
- Low Latency Queuing (LLQ)
# 9.3.3 First In First Out
In its simplest form, First In First Out (FIFO) queuing, also known as first-come, first-served queuing, buffers and forwards packets in the order of their arrival.

FIFO has no concept of priority or classes of traffic and consequently, makes no decision about packet priority. There is only one queue, and all packets are treated equally.

# 9.3.4 Weighted Fair Queuing (WFQ)
Weighted Fair Queuing (WFQ) is an automated scheduling method that provides fair bandwidth allocation to all network traffic. WFQ does not allow classification options to be configured. WFQ applies priority, or weights, to identified traffic and classifies it into conversations or flows.

WFQ then determines how much bandwidth each flow is allowed relative to other flows. The flow-based algorithm used by WFQ simultaneously schedules interactive traffic to the front of a queue to reduce response time. It then fairly shares the remaining bandwidth among high-bandwidth flows. WFQ allows you to give low-volume, interactive traffic, such as Telnet sessions and voice, priority over high-volume traffic, such as FTP sessions.

WFQ classifies traffic into different flows based on packet header addressing, including such characteristics as source and destination IP addresses, MAC addresses, port numbers, protocol, and Type of Service (ToS) value. The ToS value in the IP header can be used to classify traffic.

**Limitations**

WFQ is not supported with tunneling and encryption because these features modify the packet content information required by WFQ for classification.

# 9.3.5 Class-Based Weighted Fair Queuing (CBWFQ)
Class-Based Weighted Fair Queuing (CBWFQ) extends the standard WFQ functionality to provide support for user-defined traffic classes. With CBWFQ, you define traffic classes based on match criteria including protocols, access control lists (ACLs), and input interfaces. Packets satisfying the match criteria for a class constitute the traffic for that class. A FIFO queue is reserved for each class, and traffic belonging to a class is directed to the queue for that class.

When a class has been defined according to its match criteria, you can assign it characteristics. To characterize a class, you also specify the queue limit for that class, which is the maximum number of packets allowed to accumulate in the queue for the class.

# 9.3.6 Low Latency Queuing (LLQ)
The Low Latency Queuing (LLQ) feature brings strict priority queuing (PQ) to CBWFQ. Strict PQ allows delay-sensitive packets such as voice to be sent before packets in other queues. LLQ provides strict priority queuing for CBWFQ, reducing jitter in voice conversations.

Without LLQ, CBWFQ provides WFQ based on defined classes with no strict priority queue available for real-time traffic. The weight for a packet belonging to a specific class is derived from the bandwidth you assigned to the class when you configured it. Therefore, the bandwidth assigned to the packets of a class determines the order in which packets are sent. All packets are serviced fairly based on weight; no class of packets may be granted strict priority. This scheme poses problems for voice traffic that is largely intolerant of delay, especially variation in delay. For voice traffic, variations in delay introduce irregularities of transmission manifesting as jitter in the heard conversation.

LLQ allows delay-sensitive packets such as voice to be sent first (before packets in other queues), giving delay-sensitive packets preferential treatment over other traffic. Although it is possible to classify various types of real-time traffic to the strict priority queue, Cisco recommends that only voice traffic be directed to the priority queue.