# 12.7.2 SSID Cloaking and MAC Address Filtering
WIreless signals can travel through solid matter, such as ceilings, floors, walls, outside of the home, or office space. Without stringent security measures in place, installing a WLAN can be equivalent of putting Ethernet ports everywhere, even outside.
**SSID Cloaking**
APs and some wireless routers allow the SSID beacon frame to be disabled, as shown in the figure. Wireless clients must manually configure the SSID to connect to the network.

**MAC Addresses Filtering**
An administrator can manually permit or deny clients wireless access based on their physical MAC hardware address.

# 12.7.3 802.11 Original Authentication Methods
**Open System authentication** - Any wireless client should easily be able to connect and should only be used in situations where security is of no concern.

**Shared key authentication** - Provides mechanisms, such as WEP, WPA, WPA2, and WPA3 to authenticate and encrypt data between a wireless client and AP. However, the password must be pre-shared between both parties to connect.

# 12.7.4 Shared Key Authentication Methods

| Authentication Method          | Description                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |
| ------------------------------ | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Wired Equivalent Privacy (WEP) | The original 802.11 specification designed to secure the data using the Rivest Cipher 4 (RC4) encryption method with a static key. However, the key never changes when exchanging packets. This makes it easy to hack. WEP is no longer recommended and should never be used. |
| Wi-Fi Protected Access (WPA)   | A Wi-Fi Alliance standard that uses WEP, but secures the data with the much stronger Temporal Key Integrity Protocol (TKIP) encryption algorithm. TKIP changes the key for each packet.                                                                                       |
| WPA2                           | Current industry standard for securing wireless networks. It uses the Advanced Encryption Standard (AES) for encryption.                                                                                                                                                      |
| WPA3                           | Uses Protected Management Frames (PMF).                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |
# 12.7.5 Authenticating a Home User.
WPA2/3 has two authentication methods:
- **Personal** - Uses a pre-shared key (PSK).
- **Enterprise** - Uses Remote Authentication Dial-In User Service (RADIUS) authentication server. The device must be authenticated by the RADIUS server and then users must authenticate using 802.1X standard, which uses the Extensive Authentication Protocol (EAP) for authentication.
# 12.7.6 Encryption Methods
**Temporal Key Integrity Protocol (TKIP)** - It makes use of WEP, but encrypts the Layer 2 payload using TKIP, and carries out a Message Integrity Check (MIC) in the encrypted packet to ensure the message has not been altered.

**Advanced Encryption Standard (AES)** - It uses the Counter Cipher Mode with Block Chaining Message Authentication Code Protocol (CCMP) that allows destination hosts to recognize if the encrypted and non-encrypted bit have been altered.

# 12.7.7 Authentication in the Enterprise
**RADIUS Server IP address** - This is the reachable address of the RADIUS server.
**UDP port numbers** - Officially assigned UDP ports 1812 for RADIUS Authentication, and 1813 for RADIUS Accounting, but can also operate using UDP ports 1645 and 1646.
**Shared Key** - Used to authenticate the AP with the RADIUS server.

The 802.1X login process uses EAP to communicate with the PA and RADIUS server. EAP is a framework for authenticating network access. It can provide a secure authentication mechanism and negotiate a seucre private key which can then be used for a wireless encryption session using TKIP or AES encryption.

# 12.7.8 WPA3
WPA3 includes four features:

**WPA3-Personal**
WPA3-Personall thwarts threat actors listening on the "hanshake" to try and guess the PSK, by using Simultaneous Authentication of Equals (SAE), a feature specified in the IEEE 802.11-2016. The PSK is never exposed, making it impossible for the threat actor to guess.

**WPA3-Enterprise**
WPA3-Enterprise still uses 802.1X/EAP authentication. However, it requires the use of a 192-bit cryptographic suite and eliminates the mixing of security protocols.  WPA3-Enterprise adheres to the Commercial National Security Algorithm (CNSA) Suite which is commonly used in high security Wi-Fi networks.

**Open Networks**
In WPA3, it is used Opportunistic Wireless Encryption (OWE) to encypt all wireless traffic.

**IoT Onboarding**
The Device Provisioning Protocol (DPP) was designed to address the need of a secure Wi-Fi Protected Setup (WPS). Each headless device has a hardcoded public key. The key is typically stamped on the outside of the device or its packaging as a Quick Response (QR) code. The network administrator can scan the QR code and quickly onboard the device.

