# 15.1.1 Network Security Topology
An important part of the job of the cybersecurity analyst is to review all alerts generated by network devices and determine the validity of the alerts. Was that file that was downloaded by user X really malware? Is that website that was visited by user Y really malicious? Is the printer on the third floor really compromised because it is trying to connect to a server that is out on the internet? These are questions that are commonly asked by security analysts daily. It is their job to determine the correct answers.
# 15.1.2 Network Monitoring Methods
The day-to-day operation of a network consists of common patterns of traffic flow, bandwidth usage, and resource access. Together, these patterns identify normal network behavior. Security analysts must be intimately familiar with normal network behavior because abnormal network behavior typically indicates a problem.

To determine normal network behavior, network monitoring must be implemented. Various tools are used to help discover normal network behavior including IDS, packet analyzers, SNMP, NetFlow, and others.

Some of these tools require captured network data. There are two common methods used to capture traffic and send it to network monitoring devices:

- Network taps, sometimes known as test access points (TAPs)
- Traffic mirroring using Switch Port Analyzer (SPAN) or other port mirroring.
# 15.1.3 Network Taps
A network tap is typically a passive splitting device implemented inline between a device of interest and the network. A tap forwards all traffic, including physical layer errors, to an analysis device while also allowing the traffic to reach its intended destination.
A tap simultaneously sends both the transmit (TX) data stream from the internal router and the receive (RX) data stream to the internal router on separate, dedicated channels. This ensures that all data arrives at the monitoring device in real time. Therefore, network performance is not affected or degraded by monitoring the connection.
# 15.1.4 Traffic Mirroring and SPAN
|SPAN Term|Description|
|---|---|
|**Ingress traffic**|Traffic that enters the switch.|
|**Egress traffic**|Traffic that leaves the switch.|
|**Source (SPAN) port**|Source ports are monitored as traffic entering them is replicated (mirrored) to the destination ports.|
|**Destination (SPAN) port**|A port that mirrors source ports. Destination SPAN ports often connect to analysis devices such as a packet analyzer or an IDS.|
## SPAN
The switch will forward ingress traffic on F0/1 and egress traffic on F0/2 to the destination SPAN port G0/1 that connects to an IDS.

The association between source ports and a destination port is called a SPAN session. In a single session, one or multiple ports can be monitored. On some Cisco switches, session traffic can be copied to more than one destination port. Alternatively, a source VLAN can be specified in which all ports in the source VLAN become sources of SPAN traffic. Each SPAN session can have ports or VLANs as sources, but not both.

**Note:** A variation of SPAN called Remote SPAN (RSPAN) enables a network administrator to use the flexibility of VLANs to monitor traffic on remote switches.