# 26.1.1 Security Onion
Security Onion is an open-source suite of Network Security Monitoring (NSM) tools that run on an Ubuntu Linux distribution. Security Onion tools provide three core functions for the cybersecurity analyst: full packet capture and data types, network-based and host-based intrusion detection systems, and alert analyst tools. Security Onion can be installed as a standalone installation or as a sensor and server platform. Some components of Security Onion are owned and maintained by corporations, such as Cisco and Riverbend Technologies, but are made available as open source.
1. Analysis
2. Detection
3. Data
# 26.1.2 Detection Tools for Collecting Alert Data
Security Onion contains many components. It is an integrated environment which is designed to simplify the deployment of a comprehensive NSM solution.
### Detection
- **CapME**: This is a web application that allows viewing of pcap transcripts rendered with the tcpflow or Zeek tools. CapME can be accessed from the Enterprise Log Search and Archive (ELSA) tool. CapME provides the cybersecurity analyst with an easy-to-read means of viewing an entire Layer 4 session. CapME acts as a plugin to ELSA and provides access to relevant pcap files that can be opened in Wireshark.
- **Snort**: This is a Network Intrusion Detection System (NIDS). It is an important source of alert data that is indexed in the Sguil analysis tool. Snort uses rules and signatures to generate alerts. Snort can automatically download new rules using the PulledPork component of Security Onion. Snort and PulledPork are open source tools that are sponsored by Cisco.
- **Zeek**: Formerly known as Bro. This is a NIDS that uses more of a behavior-based approach to intrusion detection. Rather than using signatures or rules, Zeek uses policies, in the form of scripts that determine what data to log and when to issue alert notifications. Zeek can also submit file attachments for malware analysis, block access to malicious locations, and shut down a computer that appears to be violating security policies.
- **OSSEC**: This is a host-based intrusion detection system (HIDS) that is integrated into Security Onion. It actively monitors host system operations, including conducting file integrity monitoring, local log monitoring, system process monitoring, and rootkit detection. OSSEC alerts and log data are available to Sguil and Kibana. OSSEC requires an agent to be running on the Windows computers in the enterprise.
- **Wazuh**: Wazuh is a HIDS that will replace OSSEC in Security Onion. It is a full-featured solution that provides a broad spectrum of endpoint protection mechanisms including host logfile analysis, file integrity monitoring, vulnerability detection, configuration assessment, and incident response. Like OSSEC, it requires agents to be running on network hosts.
- **Suricata**: This is a NIDS that uses a signature-based approach. It can also be used for inline intrusion prevention. It is similar to Zeek; however, Suricata uses native multithreading, which allows the distribution of packet stream processing across multiple processor cores. It also includes some additional features such as reputation-based blocking and support for Graphics Processing Unit (GPU) multithreading for performance improvement.
### Data
- **PCAPS**
- **Content Data**
- **Transaction Data**
- **Session Data**
- **Host Logs**
- **Alert Data**
- **Syslog Data**
- **Metadata**
# 26.1.3 Analysis Tools

- **Sguil**: This provides a high-level console for investigating security alerts from a wide variety of sources. Sguil serves as a starting point in the investigation of security alerts. A wide variety of data sources are available to the cybersecurity analyst by pivoting directly from Sguil to other tools.
- **Wireshark**: This is a packet capture application that is integrated into the Security Onion suite. It can be opened directly from other tools and will display full packet captures relevant to an analysis.
- **Kibana**: Kibana is an interactive dashboard interface to Elasticsearch data. It allows querying of NSM data and provides flexible visualizations of that data. It provides data exploration and machine learning data analysis features. It is possible to pivot from Sguil directly into Kibana to see contextualized displays based on the source and destination IP addresses that are associated with an alert. Search the internet and visit the [elastic.co](http://elastic.co) website to learn more about the many features of Kibana.
# 26.1.4 Alert Generation
Security alerts are notification messages that are generated by NSM tools, systems, and security devices. Alerts can come in many forms depending on the source. For example, syslog provides support for severity ratings which can be used to alert cybersecurity analysts regarding events that require attention.

In Security Onion, Sguil provides a console that integrates alerts from multiple sources into a timestamped queue. A cybersecurity analyst can work through the security queue investigating, classifying, escalating, or retiring alerts. Instead of using a dedicated workflow management system such as Request Tracker for Incident Response (RTIR), a cybersecurity analyst would use the output of an application like Sguil to orchestrate an NSM investigation.
Alerts will generally include five-tuples information when available, as well as timestamps and information identifying which device or system generated the alert. Recall that the five-tuples includes the following information for tracking a conversation between a source and destination application:

- **SrcIP** - the source IP address for the event.
- **SPort** - the source (local) Layer 4 port for the event.
- **DstIP** - the destination IP for the event.
- **DPort** - the destination Layer 4 port for the event.
- **Pr** - the IP protocol number for the event.

Additional information could be whether a permit or deny decision was applied to the traffic, some captured data from the packet payload, or a hash value for a downloaded file, or any of a variety of data.

# 26.1.5 Rules and Alerts
Alerts can come from a number of sources:

- **NIDS** - Snort, Zeek, and Suricata
- **HIDS** - OSSEC, Wazuh
- **Asset management and monitoring** - Passive Asset Detection System (PADS)
- **HTTP, DNS, and TCP transactions** - Recorded by Zeek and pcaps
- **Syslog messages** - Multiple sources

The information found in the alerts that are displayed in Sguil will differ in message format because they come from different sources.

The Sguil alert in the figure was triggered by a rule that was configured in Snort. It is important for the cybersecurity analyst to be able to interpret what triggered the alert so that the alert can be investigated. For this reason, the cybersecurity analyst should understand the components of Snort rules, which are a major source of alerts in Security Onion.
# 26.1.6 Snort Rule Structure
|Component|Example (shortened…)|Explanation|
|---|---|---|
|rule header|alert ip any any -> any any|Contains the action to be taken, source and destination addresses and port, and the direction of traffic flow|
|rule options|(msg:”GPL ATTACK_RESPONSE ID CHECK RETURNED ROOT”;…)|Includes the message to be displayed, details of packet content, alert type, source ID, and additional details, such as a reference for the rule or vulnerability|
|rule location|/nsm/server_data/securityonion/rules/…|Added by Sguil to indicate the location of the rule in the Security Onion file structure and in the specified rule file|

Snort can be configured to use variables to represent internal and external IP addresses. These variables, **\$HOME_NET** and **\$EXTERNAL_NET**, appear in the Snort rules.
#### Snort Rule Header Structure
|Component|Explanation|
|---|---|
|alert|the action to be taken is to issue an alert, other actions are log and pass|
|ip|the protocol|
|any any|the specified source is any IP address and any Layer 4 port|
|->|the direction of flow is from the source to the destination|
|any any|the specified destination is any IP address and any Layer 4 port|
**The Rule Options**
The structure of the options section of the rule is variable. It is the portion of the rule that is enclosed in parenthesis, as shown in the figure. It contains the text message that identifies the alert. It also contains metadata about the alert, such as a URL that provides reference information for the alert. Other information can be included, such as the type of rule and a unique numeric identifier for the rule and the rule revision. In addition, features of the packet payload may be specified in the options. The Snort users manual, which can be found on the internet, provides details about rules and how to create them.

Snort rule messages may include the source of the rule. Three common sources for Snort rules are:

- **GPL** – Older Snort rules that were created by Sourcefire and distributed under a GPLv2. The GPL ruleset is not Cisco Talos certified. It includes Snort SIDs 3464 and below. The GPL ruleset is can be downloaded from the Snort website, and it is included in Security Onion.
- **ET** – Snort rules from Emerging Threats. Emerging Threats is a collection point for Snort rules from multiple sources. ET rules are open source under a BSD license. The ET ruleset contains rules from multiple categories. A set of ET rules is included with Security Onion. Emerging Threats is a division of Proofpoint, Inc.
- **VRT** – These rules are immediately available to subscribers and are released to registered users 30 days after they were created, with some limitations. They are now created and maintained by Cisco Talos.
#### Snort Rules Options Structure
|Component|Explanation|
|---|---|
|msg:|Text that describes the alert.|
|content:|Refers to content of the packet. In this case, an alert will be sent if the literal text “uid=0(root)” appears anywhere in the packet data. Values specifying the location of the text in the data payload can be provided.|
|reference:|This is not shown in the figure. It is often a link to a URL that provides more information on the rule. In this case, the sid is hyperlinked to the source of the rule on the internet.|
|classtype:|A category for the attack. Snort includes a set of default categories that have one of four priority values.|
|sid:|A unique numeric identifier for the rule.|
|rev:|The revision of the rule that is represented by the sid.|