# 10.1.1 CDP Overview
CDP is a Cisco proprietary Layer 2 protocol that is used to gather information about Cisco devices which share the same data link. CDP is media and protocol independent and runs on all Cisco devices, such as routers, switches, and access servers.

The device sends periodic CDP advertisements to connected devices. These advertisements share information about the type of device that is discovered, the name of the devices, and the number and type of the interfaces.
# 10.1.2 Configure and Verify CDP
To verify the status of CDP and display information about CDP, enter the **show cdp** command:
```
Router# show cdp
Global CDP information:
      Sending CDP packets every 60 seconds
      Sending a holdtime value of 180 seconds
      Sending CDPv2 advertisements is enabled
```

To enable CDP globally for all the supported interfaces on the device, enter **cdp run** in the global configuration mode. CDP can be disabled for all the interfaces on the device with the **no cdp run** command in the global configuration mode.
```
Router(config)# no cdp run
Router(config)# exit
Router# show cdp
CDP is not enabled
Router# configure terminal
Router(config)# cdp run
```

To disable CDP on a specific interface, such as the interface facing an ISP, enter **no cdp enable** in the interface configuration mode. CDP is still enabled on the device; however, no more CDP advertisements will be sent out that interface.

To verify the status of CDP and display a list of neighbors, use the **show cdp neighbors** command in the privileged EXEC mode. The **show cdp neighbors detail** command displays important information about the CDP neighbors.

Use the **show cdp interface** command to display the interfaces that are CDP-enabled on a device. The status of each interface is also displayed.

#  10.1.3 Discover Devices by Using CDP

With CDP enabled on the network, the **show cdp neighbors** command can be used to determine the network layout, as shown in the output.

```
R1# show cdp neighbors
Capability Codes: R - Router, T - Trans Bridge, B - Source Route Bridge                  
                  S - Switch, H - Host, I - IGMP, r - Repeater, P - Phone,
                  D - Remote, C - CVTA, M - Two-port Mac Relay
Device ID        Local Intrfce     Holdtme    Capability  Platform  Port
IDS1               Gig 0/0/1           179         S I      WS-C3560- Fas 0/5
```