# 10.2.1 LLDP Overview
The Link Layer Discovery Protocol (LLDP) does the same thing as CDP, but it is not specific to Cisco devices. As a bonus, you can still use it if you have Cisco devices. One way or another, you will get your network map.

LLDP is a vendor-neutral neighbor discovery protocol similar to CDP. LLDP works with network devices, such as routers, switches, and wireless LAN access points. This protocol advertises its identity and capabilities to other devices and receives the information from a physically-connected Layer 2 device.

# 10.2.2 Configure and Verify LLDP
Depending on the device, LLDP may be enabled by default. To enable LLDP globally on a Cisco network device, enter the **lldp run** command in the global configuration mode. To disable LLDP, enter the **no lldp run** command in the global configuration mode.
Similar to CDP, LLDP can be configured on specific interfaces. However, LLDP must be configured separately to transmit and receive LLDP packets.
To verify LLDP has been enabled on the device, enter the **show lldp** command in privileged EXEC mode.
```
Switch# conf t
Enter configuration commands, one per line.  End with CNTL/Z.
Switch(config)# lldp run
Switch(config)# interface gigabitethernet 0/1
Switch(config-if)# lldp transmit
Switch(config-if)# lldp receive
Switch(config-if)# end
Switch# show lldp
Global LLDP Information:
    Status: ACTIVE
    LLDP advertisements are sent every 30 seconds
    LLDP hold time advertised is 120 seconds
    LLDP interface reinitialisation delay is 2 seconds
```

# 10.2.3 Discover Devices by Using LLDP
With LLDP enabled, device neighbors can be discovered by using the **show lldp neighbors** command, as displayed in the output.
```
S1# show lldp neighbors
Capability codes:
    (R) Router, (B) Bridge, (T) Telephone, (C) DOCSIS Cable Device
    (W) WLAN Access Point, (P) Repeater, (S) Station, (O) Other
Device ID           Local Intf     Hold-time  Capability      Port ID
R1                  Fa0/5          117        R               Gi0/0/1
S2                  Fa0/1          112        B               Fa0/1
Total entries displayed: 2
```

When more details about the neighbors are needed, the **show lldp neighbors detail** command can provide information, such as the neighbor IOS version, IP address, and device capability.