# 10.4.1 Introduction to SNMP
SNMP was developed to allow administrators to manage nodes such as servers, workstations, routers, switches, and security appliances, on an IP network. It enables network administrators to monitor and manage network performance, find and solve network problems, and plan for network growth.

SNMP is an application layer protocol that provides a message format for communication between managers and agents. The SNMP system consists of three elements:

- SNMP manager
- SNMP agents (managed node)
- Management Information Base (MIB)

To configure SNMP on a networking device, it is first necessary to define the relationship between the manager and the agent.

The SNMP manager is part of a network management system (NMS). The SNMP manager runs SNMP management software. In addition, SNMP agents can forward information directly to a network manager by using “traps”.

The SNMP agent and MIB reside on SNMP client devices. Network devices that must be managed, such as switches, routers, servers, firewalls, and workstations, are equipped with an SMNP agent software module. MIBs store data about the device and operational statistics and are meant to be available to authenticated remote users. The SNMP agent is responsible for providing access to the local MIB.

SNMP defines how management information is exchanged between network management applications and management agents. The SNMP manager polls the agents and queries the MIB for SNMP agents on UDP port 161. SNMP agents send any SNMP traps to the SNMP manager on UDP port 162.

# 10.4.2 SNMP Operation
The SNMP manager then uses the SNMP agent to access information within the MIB.

| **Operation**        | **Description**                                                                                                                                                                                     |
| -------------------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| **get-request**      | Retrieves a value from a specific variable.                                                                                                                                                         |
| **get-next-request** | Retrieves a value from a variable within a table; the SNMP manager does not need to know the exact variable name. A sequential search is performed to find the needed variable from within a table. |
| **get-bulk-request** | Retrieves large blocks of data, such as multiple rows in a table, that would otherwise require the transmission of many small blocks of data. (Only works with SNMPv2 or later.)                    |
| **get-response**     | Replies to a **get-request, get-next-request,** and **set-request** sent by an NMS.                                                                                                                 |
| **set-request**      | Stores a value in a specific variable.                                                                                                                                                              |
The SNMP agent responds to SNMP manager requests as follows:

- **Get an MIB variable** – The SNMP agent performs this function in response to a GetRequest-PDU from the network manager. The agent retrieves the value of the requested MIB variable and responds to the network manager with that value.
- **Set an MIB variable** – The SNMP agent performs this function in response to a SetRequest-PDU from the network manager. The SNMP agent changes the value of the MIB variable to the value specified by the network manager. An SNMP agent reply to a set request includes the new settings in the device.
# 10.4.3 SNMP Agent Traps
An NMS periodically polls the SNMP agents that are residing on managed devices using the get request. The NMS queries the device for data. Using this process, a network management application can collect information to monitor traffic loads and to verify the device configurations of managed devices

Periodic SNMP polling does have disadvantages. First, there is a delay between the time that an event occurs and the time that it is noticed (via polling) by the NMS. Second, there is a trade-off between polling frequency and bandwidth usage.

To mitigate these disadvantages, it is possible for SNMP agents to generate and send traps to inform the NMS immediately of certain events. Traps are unsolicited messages alerting the SNMP manager to a condition or event on the network. Examples of trap conditions include, but are not limited to, improper user authentication, restarts, link status (up or down), MAC address tracking, closing of a TCP connection, loss of connection to a neighbor, or other significant events. Trap-directed notifications reduce network and agent resources by eliminating the need for some of SNMP polling requests.

# 10.4.4 SNMP Versions
There are several versions of SNMP:

- **SNMPv1** – This is the Simple Network Management Protocol, a Full Internet Standard, that is defined in RFC 1157.
- **SNMPv2c** – This is defined in RFCs 1901 to 1908. It uses a community-string-based Administrative Framework.
- **SNMPv3** – This is an interoperable standards-based protocol originally defined in RFCs 2273 to 2275. It provides secure access to devices by authenticating and encrypting packets over the network. It includes these security features: message integrity to ensure that a packet was not tampered with in transit, authentication to determine that the message is from a valid source, and encryption to prevent the contents of a message from being read by an unauthorized source.
Both SNMPv1 and SNMPv2c use a community-based form of security. The community of managers that is able to access the MIB of the agent is defined by a community string.

The table identifies the characteristics of the different combinations of security models and levels.

| **SNMPv1**         |                                                   |
| ------------------ | ------------------------------------------------- |
| **Level**          | noAuthNoPriv                                      |
| **Authentication** | Community string                                  |
| **Encryption**     | No                                                |
| **Result**         | Uses a community string match for authentication. |

| **SNMPv2c**        |                                                   |
| ------------------ | ------------------------------------------------- |
| **Level**          | noAuthNoPriv                                      |
| **Authentication** | Community string                                  |
| **Encryption**     | No                                                |
| **Result**         | Uses a community string match for authentication. |

|**SNMPv3 noAuthNoPriv**|   |
|---|---|
|**Level**|noAuthNoPriv|
|**Authentication**|Username|
|**Encryption**|No|
|**Result**|Uses a username match for authentication (an improvement over SNMPv2c).|

| **SNMPv3 authNoPriv** |                                                                       |
| --------------------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| **Level**             | authNoPriv                                                            |
| **Authentication**    | Message Digest 5 (MD5) or Secure Hash Algorithm (SHA)                 |
| **Encryption**        | No                                                                    |
| **Result**            | Provides authentication based on the HMAC-MD5 or HMAC-SHA algorithms. |

| **SNMPv3 authPriv** |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
| ------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| **Level**           | authPriv (requires the cryptographic software image)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |
| **Authentication**  | MD5 or SHA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
| **Encryption**      | Data Encryption Standard (DES) or Advanced Encryption Standard (AES)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |
| **Result**          | Provides authentication based on the HMAC-MD5 or HMAC-SHA algorithms. Allows specifying the User-based Security Model (USM) with these encryption algorithms:<br><br>- DES 56-bit encryption in addition to authentication based on the CBC-DES (DES-56) standard<br>- 3DES 168-bit encryption<br>- AES 128-bit, 192-bit, or 256-bit encryption |

# 10.4.6 Community Strings
For SNMP to operate, the NMS must have access to the MIB. To ensure that access requests are valid, some form of authentication must be in place.

SNMPv1 and SNMPv2c use community strings that control access to the MIB. Community strings are plaintext passwords. SNMP community strings authenticate access to MIB objects.

There are two types of community strings:

- **Read-only (ro)** – This type provides access to the MIB variables, but does not allow these variables to be changed, only read. Because security is minimal in version 2c, many organizations use SNMPv2c in read-only mode.
- **Read-write (rw)** – This type provides read and write access to all objects in the MIB.

To view or set MIB variables, the user must specify the appropriate community string for read or write access.

# 10.4.7 MIB Object ID
The MIB organizes variables hierarchically. MIB variables enable the management software to monitor and control the network device. Formally, the MIB defines each variable as an object ID (OID). OIDs uniquely identify managed objects in the MIB hierarchy. The MIB organizes the OIDs based on RFC standards into a hierarchy of OIDs, usually shown as a tree.

RFCs define some common public variables. Most devices implement these MIB variables. In addition, networking equipment vendors, like Cisco, can define their own private branches of the tree to accommodate new variables specific to their devices.

OIDs belonging to Cisco, are numbered as follows: .iso (1).org (3).dod (6).internet (1).private (4).enterprises (1).cisco (9). Therefore, the OID is 1.3.6.1.4.1.9.
# 10.4.8 SNMP Polling Scenario
SNMP can be used is to observe CPU utilization over a period of time by polling devices. CPU statistics can then be compiled on the NMS and graphed. This creates a baseline for the network administrator. Threshold values can then be set relative to this baseline. When CPU utilization exceeds this threshold, notifications are sent.

The data is retrieved via the snmpget utility, issued on the NMS. Using the snmpget utility, you can manually retrieve real-time data, or have the NMS run a report. This report would give you a period of time that you could use the data to get the average. The snmpget utility requires that the SNMP version, the correct community, the IP address of the network device to query, and the OID number are set.

# 10.4.9 SNMP Object Navigator
The snmpget utility gives some insight into the basic mechanics of how SNMP works. However, working with long MIB variable names like 1.3.6.1.4.1.9.2.1.58.0 can be problematic for the average user. More commonly, the network operations staff uses a network management product with an easy-to-use GUI, which makes the entire MIB data variable naming transparent to the user.

The Cisco SNMP Navigator on the ht​tp://www.cisco.com website allows a network administrator to research details about a particular OID.