# 8.1.1 Virtual Private Networks
A VPN is private in that the traffic is encrypted to keep the data confidential while it is transported across the public network.
- A Cisco Adaptive Security Appliance (ASA) firewall helps organizations provide secure, high performance connectivity including VPNs and always-on access for remote branches and mobile users.
- SOHO stands for small office home office where a VPN-enabled router can provide VPN connectivity back to the corporate main site.
- Cisco AnyConnect is software that remote workers can use to establish client-based VPN connection with the main site.
The first types of VPNs were strictly IP tunnels that did not include authentication or encryption of the data. For example, Generic Routing Encapsulation (GRE) is a tunneling protocol developed by Cisco and which does not include encryption services. It is used to encapsulate IPv4 and IPv6 traffic inside an IP tunnel to create a virtual point-to-point link.

# 8.1.2 VPN Benefits
|**Benefit**|**Description**|
|---|---|
|**Cost Savings**|With the advent of cost-effective, high-bandwidth technologies, organizations can use VPNs to reduce their connectivity costs while simultaneously increasing remote connection bandwidth.|
|**Security**|VPNs provide the highest level of security available, by using advanced encryption and authentication protocols that protect data from unauthorized access.|
|**Scalability**|VPNs allow organizations to use the internet, making it easy to add new users without adding significant infrastructure.|
|**Compatibility**|VPNs can be implemented across a wide variety of WAN link options including all the popular broadband technologies. Remote workers can take advantage of these high-speed connections to gain secure access to their corporate networks.|
# 8.1.3 Site-to-Site and Remote-Access VPNs
**Site-to-Site VPN**

A site-to-site VPN is created when VPN terminating devices, also called VPN gateways, are preconfigured with information to establish a secure tunnel. VPN traffic is only encrypted between these devices. Internal hosts have no knowledge that a VPN is being used.

**Remote-Access VPN**

A remote-access VPN is dynamically created to establish a secure connection between a client and a VPN terminating device. For example, a remote access SSL VPN is used when you check your banking information online.

# 8.1.4 Enterprise and Service Provider VPNs
PNs can be managed and deployed as:

- **Enterprise VPNs** – Enterprise-managed VPNs are a common solution for securing enterprise traffic across the internet. Site-to-site and remote access VPNs are created and managed by the enterprise using both IPsec and SSL VPNs.
- **Service Provider VPNs** – Service provider-managed VPNs are created and managed over the provider network. The provider uses Multiprotocol Label Switching (MPLS) at Layer 2 or Layer 3 to create secure channels between an enterprise’s sites. MPLS is a routing technology the provider uses to create virtual paths between sites. This effectively segregates the traffic from other customer traffic. Other legacy solutions include Frame Relay and Asynchronous Transfer Mode (ATM) VPNs.