# 8.2.1 Remote-Access VPNs
- **Clientless VPN connection** -The connection is secured using a web browser SSL connection. SSL is mostly used to protect HTTP traffic (HTTPS), and email protocols such as IMAP and POP3. For example, HTTPS is actually HTTP using an SSL tunnel. The SSL connection is first established, and then HTTP data is exchanged over the connection.
- **Client-based VPN connection** – VPN client software such as Cisco AnyConnect Secure Mobility Client must be installed on the remote user’s end device. Users must initiate the VPN connection using the VPN client and then authenticate to the destination VPN gateway. When remote users are authenticated, they have access to corporate files and applications. The VPN client software encrypts the traffic using IPsec or SSL and forwards it over the internet to the destination VPN gateway.
# 8.2.2 SSL VPNs
When a client negotiates an SSL VPN connection with the VPN gateway, it actually connects using Transport Layer Security (TLS). TLS is the newer version of SSL and is sometimes expressed as SSL/TLS. However, both terms are often used interchangeably.

SSL uses the public key infrastructure and digital certificates to authenticate peers. Both IPsec and SSL VPN technologies offer access to virtually any network application or resource. However, when security is an issue, IPsec is the superior choice. If support and ease of deployment are the primary issues, consider SSL. The type of VPN method implemented is based on the access requirements of the users and the organization’s IT processes. The table compares IPsec and SSL remote access deployments.

| Feature                     | IPsec                                                                              | SSL                                                                       |
| --------------------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| **Applications supported**  | **Extensive** – All IP-based applications are supported.                           | **Limited** – Only web-based applications and file sharing are supported. |
| **Authentication strength** | **Strong** – Uses two-way authentication with shared keys or digital certificates. | **Moderate** – Using one-way or two-way authentication.                   |
| **Encryption strength**     | **Strong** – Uses key lengths from 56 bits to 256 bits.                            | **Moderate to strong** – With key lengths from 40 bits to 256 bits.       |
| **Connection complexity**   | **Medium** – Because it requires a VPN client pre-installed on a host.             | **Low** – It only requires a web browser on a host.                       |
| **Connection option**       | **Limited** – Only specific devices with specific configurations can connect.      | **Extensive** – Any device with a web browser can connect.                |
# 8.2.3 Site-to-Site IPsec VPNs

Site-to-site VPNs are used to connect networks across another untrusted network such as the internet. In a site-to-site VPN, end hosts send and receive normal unencrypted TCP/IP traffic through a VPN terminating device. The VPN terminating is typically called a VPN gateway. A VPN gateway device could be a router or a firewall, as shown in the figure. For example, the Cisco Adaptive Security Appliance (ASA) shown on the right side of the figure is a standalone firewall device that combines firewall, VPN concentrator, and intrusion prevention functionality into one software image.

The VPN gateway encapsulates and encrypts outbound traffic for all traffic from a particular site. It then sends the traffic through a VPN tunnel over the internet to a VPN gateway at the target site. Upon receipt, the receiving VPN gateway strips the headers, decrypts the content, and relays the packet toward the target host inside its private network.

Site-to-site VPNs are typically created and secured using IP security (IPsec).

# 8.2.4 GRE over IPsec
Generic Routing Encapsulation (GRE) is a non-secure site-to-site VPN tunneling protocol. It can encapsulate various network layer protocols. It also supports multicast and broadcast traffic which may be necessary if the organization requires routing protocols to operate over a VPN. However, GRE does not by default support encryption; and therefore, it does not provide a secure VPN tunnel.

A standard IPsec VPN (non-GRE) can only create secure tunnels for unicast traffic. Therefore, routing protocols will not exchange routing information over an IPsec VPN.

To solve this problem, we can encapsulate routing protocol traffic using a GRE packet, and then encapsulate the GRE packet into an IPsec packet to forward it securely to the destination VPN gateway.

The terms used to describe the encapsulation of GRE over IPsec tunnel are passenger protocol, carrier protocol, and transport protocol.
- **Passenger protocol** – This is the original packet that is to be encapsulated by GRE. It could be an IPv4 or IPv6 packet, a routing update, and more.
- **Carrier protocol** – GRE is the carrier protocol that encapsulates the original passenger packet.
- **Transport protocol** – This is the protocol that will actually be used to forward the packet. This could be IPv4 or IPv6.
# 8.2.5 Dynamic Multipoint VPNs
Site-to-site IPsec VPNs and GRE over IPsec are adequate to use when there are only a few sites to securely interconnect. However, they are not sufficient when the enterprise adds many more sites. This is because each site would require static configurations to all other sites, or to a central site.

Dynamic Multipoint VPN (DMVPN) is a Cisco software solution for building multiple VPNs in an easy, dynamic, and scalable manner. Like other VPN types, DMVPN relies on IPsec to provide secure transport over public networks, such as the internet.

DMVPN simplifies the VPN tunnel configuration and provides a flexible option to connect a central site with branch sites. It uses a hub-and-spoke configuration to establish a full mesh topology. Spoke sites establish secure VPN tunnels with the hub site.

Each site is configured using Multipoint Generic Routing Encapsulation (mGRE). The mGRE tunnel interface allows a single GRE interface to dynamically support multiple IPsec tunnels. Therefore, when a new site requires a secure connection, the same configuration on the hub site would support the tunnel. No additional configuration would be required.

Spoke sites could also obtain information about remote sites from the central site. They can use this information to establish direct VPN tunnels.

# 8.2.6 IPsec Virtual Tunnel Interface
Like DMVPNs, IPsec Virtual Tunnel Interface (VTI) simplifies the configuration process required to support multiple sites and remote access. IPsec VTI configurations are applied to a virtual interface instead of static mapping the IPsec sessions to a physical interface.

IPsec VTI is capable of sending and receiving both IP unicast and multicast encrypted traffic. Therefore, routing protocols are automatically supported without having to configure GRE tunnels.

IPsec VTI can be configured between sites or in a hub-and-spoke topology.

# 8.2.7 Service Provider MPLS VPNs
Traditional service provider WAN solutions such as leased lines, Frame Relay, and ATM connections were inherently secure in their design. Today, service providers use MPLS in their core network. Traffic is forwarded through the MPLS backbone using labels that are previously distributed among the core routers. Like legacy WAN connections, traffic is secure because service provider customers cannot see each other’s traffic.

MPLS can provide clients with managed VPN solutions; therefore, securing traffic between client sites is the responsibility of the service provider. There are two types of MPLS VPN solutions supported by service providers:

- **Layer 3 MPLS VPN** – The service provider participates in customer routing by establishing a peering between the customer’s routers and the provider’s routers. Then customer routes that are received by the provider’s router are then redistributed through the MPLS network to the customer’s remote locations.
- **Layer 2 MPLS VPN** – The service provider is not involved in the customer routing. Instead, the provider deploys a Virtual Private LAN Service (VPLS) to emulate an Ethernet multiaccess LAN segment over the MPLS network. No routing is involved. The customer’s routers effectively belong to the same multiaccess network.