# 8.2.1 SLAAC Overview
The SLAAC method enables hosts to create their own unique IPv6 global unicast address without the services of a DHCPv6 server.
SLAAC is a stateless service.

SLAAC uses ICMPv6 RA messages to provide addressing and other configuration information that would normally be provided by a DHCP server. RA messages are sent by an IPv6 router every 200 seconds.

A host can also send a Router Solicitation (RS) message requesting that an IPv6-enabled router send the host an RA.

SLAAC can be deployed as SLAAC only, or SLAAC with DHCPv6.

# 8.2.2 Enabling SLAAC
**Verify IPv6 Addresses**
**Enable IPv6 Routing**
To enable the sending of RA messages, a router must join the IPv6 all-routers group using:
```
R1(config)# ipv6 unicast-routing
```
**Verify SLAAC is Enabled**
The IPv6 all-router group responds to the IPv6 multicast address ff02::2. You can use the **show ipv6 interface** command to erify if a router is enabled.
```
R1# show ipv6 interface G0/0/1 | section Joined
  Joined group address(es):
    FF02::1
    FF02::2
    FF02::1:FF00:1
R1#
```

# 8.2.3 SLAAC Only Method
The SLAAC only method is enabled by default when the **ipv6 unicast-routing** command is configured.

The A = 1 flag suggests to the clinet that it create its own IPv6 GUA using the prefix advertised in the TA. The client can create its own Interface ID using either Extended Unique Identifier method (EUI-64) or have it randomly generated.

The O= 0 and M= 0 flags instruct the client to use the information in the RA message exclusively. The RA includes the prefix, prefix-length, DNS server, MTU, and default gateway information. 

# 8.2.4 ICMPv6 RS Messages
The router sends RA messages every 200 seconds. However, it will also send an RA messages if it receives an RS message from a host.
When a client is configured to obtain its addressing information automatically, it sends an RS message to the IPv6 all-routers multicast of ff02::2

