# 8.3.1 DHCPv6 Operation Steps
Server to client DHCPv6 messages use UDP destination port 546 while client to server DHCPv6 messages use UDP destination port 547.
1. The host sends an RS message.
2. The router responds with an RA message.
3. The hosts sends a DHCPv6 SOLICIT message (FF02::02).
4. The DHCPv6 server responds with an ADVERTISE message.
5. The host responds to the DHCPv6 server. (REQUEST (stateful) or INFORMATION-REQUEST (stateless))
6. The DHCPv6 server sends a REPLY message.
# 8.3.2 Stateless DHCPv6 Operation
The stateless DHCPv6 server is only providing information that is identical for all devices on the network such as the IPv6 address of a DNS server.
# 8.3.3 Enable Stateless DHCPv6 on an Interface
Stateless DHCPv6 is enabled on a router interface using the **ipv6 nd other-config-flag** interface configuration command. This sets the O flag to 1.
```
R1(config-if)# ipv6 nd other-config-flag
R1(config-if)# end
```

# 8.3.4 Stateful DHCPv6 Operation
Stateful DHCPv6 server maintain IPv6 state information. This is similar toa DHCPv4 server allocating addresses for IPV4.

**Note**: If A=1 and M=1, some OSs such as Windows will create an IPv6 using SLAAC and obtain a different address from the stateful DHCPv6 server. In most cases it is recommended to manually set the A flag to 0.

# 8.3.5 Enable Stateful DHCPv6 on an Interface

Stateful DHCPv6 is enabled on a router interface using the **ipv6 nd managed-config-flag** interface configuration command. This sets the M flag to 1.

```
R1(config)# int g0/0/1
R1(config-if)# ipv6 nd managed-config-flag
R1(config-if)# ipv6 nd prefix default no-autoconfig
R1(config-if)# end
R1#
```

