# 12.2.2 Wireless NICs
To communicate wirelessly devices must include an wireless NICs that incorporate a radio transmitter/receiver. 
# 12.2.3 Wireless Home Router
A home user typically interconnects wireless devices using a small, wireless router.
- **Access Point** - This provides 802.11a/b/g/n/ac wireless access.
- **Switch** - This provides a four-port, full-duplex, 10/100/1000 Ethernet switch to interconnect wired devices.
- **Router** - This provides a default gateway for connecting to other network infrastructures, such as the internet.
The wireless router advertises its wireless services by sending beacons containing its shared service set identifier (SSID).

# 12.2.4 Wireless Access Points

Wireless clients use their wireless NIC to discover nearby APs advertising their SSID. Clients then attempt to associate and authenticate with an AP.
# 12.2.5 AP Categories
**Autonomous APs**
These are standalone devices configured using a command line interface or a GUI. Autonomous APs are useful in situations where only a couple of APs are required in the organization. A home router is an example of an autonomous AP because the entire AP configuration resides on the device. If the wireless demands increase, more APs would be required. Each AP would operate independent of other APs and each AP would require manual configuration and management. This would become overwhelming if many APs were needed.

**Controller-based APs**
These devices require no initial configuration and are often called lightweight APs (LAPs). LAPs use the Lightweight Access Point Protocol (LWAPP) to communicate with a WLAN controller (WLC). Controller-based APs useful in situations where many APs are in the network. Each AP is managed by the WLC.
The ports used in WLC are called Link Aggregation Group (LAG). Much how EtherChannel operates, LAG provides redundancy and load-balancing. All ports on the switch that are connected to the wLC need to be trunking and configured with EtherChannel on. However, LAG does not support PaGP or Link Aggregation Control Protocol (LACP).
# 12.2.6 Wireless Antennas
**Omnidirectional Antennas**
Provide 360-degree coverage and are ideal in houses, open office areas, conference rooms, and outside areas.

**Directional Antennas**
Focus the radio signal in a given direction. This enhances the signal to and from the AP in the direction the antenna is pointing. This provides a stronger signal strength in one direction and reduced signal strength in all other.

**MIMO Antennas**
Multiple Input Multiple Output (MIMO) uses multiple antennas to increase available bandwidth for IEEE 802.11n/ac/ax wireless networks. Up to eight transmit and receive antennas can be used to increase throughput.
