# 12.4.2 Introduction to CAPWAP
CAPWAP is an IEEE standard protocol that enables a WLC to manage multiple APs and WLANs. 
CAPWAP is also responsible for the encapsulation and forwarding of WLAN client traffic between an AP and a WLC.

CAPWAP is based on LWAPP but adds aditional security with Datagram Transport Layer Security (DTLS). CAPWAP establishes tunnels on User Datagram Protocol (UDP) ports. CAPWAP can operate either over IPv4 or IPv6.
Uses UDP port 5246 and 5247.
5247 for CAPWAP control messages used by the WLC to manage the AP. Port 5247 is used by CAPWAP to encapsulate data packets travelling to and from wireless clients.

However, CAPWAP tunnels use different IP protocols in the packet header. IPV4 uses IP protocol 17 and IPV6 uses IP protocol 136.

# 12.4.3 Split MAC Architecture
A key component of CAPWAP is the concept of split media access control (MAC). The CAPWAP split MAC concept does all of the functions normally performed by individual APs and distributes them between two function components:
- AP MAC Functions
- WLC MAC Functions

| AP MAC Functions                            | WLC MAC Functions                                  |
| ------------------------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------- |
| Beacons and probe requests                  | Authentication                                     |
| Packet acknowledgements and retransmissions | Association and re-association of roaming clients  |
| Frame queueing and packet priorization      | Frame translation to other protocols               |
| MAC layer data encryption and decryption    | Termination of 802.11 traffic on a wired interface |
# 12.4.4 DTLS Encryption
DTLS is a protocol which provides security between the AP and the WLC. It allows them to communicate using encryption and prevents eavesdropping or tampering.

DTLS is enabled by default to secure CAPWAP control channel but is disabled by default for the data channel.
All CAPWAP management and control traffic between AP and WLC is encrypted.

CAPWAP data encryption is optional and is enabled per AP. Data encryption requires a DTLS license to be installed on the WLC prior to being enabled on an AP.

# 12.4.5 FlexConnect
FlexConnect is a wireless solution for branch office and remote office deployments. It lets you configure and control access points in a branch office from the corporate office through a WAN link, without deploying a controller in each office.

There are two modes of operation for the FlexConnect AP.
- **Connected mode** - The WLC is reachable. In this mode the FlexConnect AP has CAPWAP connectivity with its WLC and can send traffic through the CAPWAP tunnel. The WLC performas all its CAPWAP functions.
- **Standalone Mode** - The WLC is unreachable. The FlexConnect has lost or failed to establish CAPWAP connectivity with its WLC. In this mdoe, a FlexConnect AP can assume some of the WLC functions such as switching client data traffic locally and performing client authentication locally.
