# 12.5.1 Frequency Channel Saturation
Wireless LAN devices have transmitters and receivers tuned to specific frequencies of radio waves to communicate. 
If the demand for a specific channel is too high, that channel is likely to become oversaturated. The saturation of the wireless medium degrades the quality of the communication.

Techniques mitigate channel saturation:

 **Direct-Sequence Spread Spectrum (DSSS)**
This is a modulation technique designed to spread a signal over a larger frequency band. Spread spectrum techniques were developed during war time to make it more difficult for enemies to intercept or jam a communication signal.
A properly configured receiver can reverse the DSSS modulation and re-construct the original signal. DSSS is used by 802.11b devices to avoid inference from other deices using the same 2.4 GHz frequency.

**Frequency-Hopping Spread Spectrum (FHSS)**
This relies on spread spectrum methods to communicate. It transmits radio signals by rapidly switching a carrier signal among many frequency channels. With the FHSS, the sender and receiver must be synchronized to "know" which channel to jump to. This channel hopping process allows for a more efficient usage of the channels, decreasing channel congestion. FHSS was used by the original 802.11 standard. Walkie talkies and 900 MHz cordless phones also use FHSS, and Bluetooth uses a variation of FHSS.

**Orthogonal Frequency-Division Multiplexing (OFDM)**
This s a subset of frequency division multiplexing in which a single channel uses multiple sub-channels on adjacent frequencies. Sub-channels in  an OFDM system are preisely orthogonal to one another which aloows the sub-channels to overlap without interfering. OFDM is used by a number of communication systems including 802.11a/g/n/ac. The new 802.11ax uses a variation of OFDM called Orthogonal frequency-division multiacess (OFDMA)
# 12.5.2 Channel Selection
Each channel is allotted 22 MHz bandwdth and is separated from the next channel by 5 MHz. The 802.11b standard identifies 11 channels for North America (13 in Europe and 14 in Japan).

Interference occurs when one signal overlaps a channel reserved for another signal, causing possible distortion. The best practice for 2.4 GHz WLANs that require multiple APs is to use non-overlapping channels, although most modern APs will do this automatically. If there are three adjacent APs, use channels 1, 6, and 11.

For the 5 GHz standards 802.11a/n/ac, there are 24 channels. The 5 GHz band is divided into three sections. Each channel is separated from the next channel by 20 MHz. The 5 GHz band has 25 Unlicensed National Information Infrastructure (U-NNI) 24 channels for the 5 GHz band. Although there is a slight overlap at the tails of each channel's frequency, the channels do not interfere with one another. 5 GHz wireless can provide faster data transmission for wireless clients in heavily populated wireless networks because of the large amount of non-overlapping wireless channels.

# 12.5.3 Plan a WLAN Deployment
When planning the location of APs, the approximate circular coverage area is important, but there are some additional recommendations:
- If APs are to use existing wiring or if there are locations where APs cannot be placed, note these locations on the MAP.
- Note all potential sources of interference which can include microwave ovens, wireless video cameras, flourescent lights, motion detectors, or any other device that uses the 2.4 GHz range.
- Position APs above obstructions.
- Position APs vertically near the celling in the center of each coverage area, if possible.
- Position APs in locations where users are expected to be.
- If an IEEE 802.11 network has been configured for mixed mode, the wireless clients may experience slower than normal speeds in order to support the older wireless standards.
