# 12.6.2 Wireless Security Overview
- **Interception of Data** - Wireless data should be encrypted to prevent it from being read by eavesdroppers.
- **Wireless intruders** - Unauthorized users attempting to access network resources can be deterred through effective authentication techniques.
- **Denial of Service (DoS) Attacks** - Access to WLAN services can be compromised either accidentally or maliciously. Various solutions exist depending on the source of the DoS attack.
- **Rogue APs** - Unauthorized APs installed by a well-intentioned user or for malicious purposes can be detected using management software.
# 12.6.3 DoS Attacks
 **Improperly configured devices** - Configuration errors can disable the WLAN. For instance, an administrator could accidentally after a configuration and disable the network, or an intruder with administrator privileges could intentionally disable a WLAN.
 **A malicious user intentionally interfering with the wireless communications** - Their goal is to disable the wireless network completely or to the point where no legitimate device can access the medium.
 **Accidental interference** - WLANs are prone no interference from other wireless devices including microwave ovens, cordless phones, baby monitors, and more. The 2.4 GHz band is more prone to interference than the 5 GHz band.

To minimize the risk of a Dos attack due to improperly configured devices and malicious attacks, harden all devices, keep passwords secure, create backups, and ensure that all configuration changes are incorporated off-hours.

Monitor the WLAN for any accidental interference problems and address them as they appear.

# 12.6.4 Rogue Access Points
A rogue AP is an AP or wireless router that has been connected to corporate network without explicit authorizations.
Rogue AP can be used by an attacker to capture MAC addresses, capture data packets, gain access to network resources, or launch a man-in-the-middle attack.

To prevent the installation of rogue APs, organizations must configure WLCs with rogue AP policies, and use monitoring software to actively monitor the radio spectrum for unauthorized
APs.

# 12.6.5 Man-in-the-Middle Attack
In a man-in-the-middle (MITM) attack, the hacker is positioned in between two legitimate entities in order to read or modify the data that passes between the two parties. There are many ways in which to create a MITM attack.

A "evil twin AP" attack, where an attacker introduces a rogue AP and configures it with the same SSID as legitimate AP.

Defeating an attack like an MITM attack depends on the sophistication of the WLAN infrastructure and the vigilance in monitoring activity on the network. The process begins baselining the WLAN to identify abnormal devices or traffic.
