# 15.3.1 Default Static Route
A default route is a static route that matches all packets. Instead of routers storing routes for all of the networks in the internet, they can store a single default route to represent any network that is not in the routing table.

Routers commonly use default routes that are either configured locally or learned from another router, using a dynamic routing protocol. A default route does not require any far-left bits to match between the default route and the destination IP address. A default route is used when no other routes in the routing table match the destination IP address of the packet. In other words, if a more specific match does not exist, then the default route is used as the Gateway of Last Resort.
**IPv4 Default Static Route**

The command syntax for an IPv4 default static route is similar to any other IPv4 static route, except that the network address is **0.0.0.0** and the subnet mask is **0.0.0.0**. The 0.0.0.0 0.0.0.0 in the route will match any network address.

**Note:** An IPv4 default static route is commonly referred to as a quad-zero route.

The basic command syntax for an IPv4 default static route is as follows:

```
Router(config)# ip route 0.0.0.0 0.0.0.0 {_ip-address_ | _exit-intf_}
```

**IPv6 Default Static Route**

The command syntax for an IPv6 default static route is similar to any other IPv6 static route, except that the ipv6-prefix/prefix-length is :**:/0**, which matches all routes

# 15.3.2 Configure a Default Static Route
The example shows an IPv4 default static route configured on R1. With the configuration shown in the example, any packets not matching more specific route entries are forwarded to R2 at 172.16.2.2.

```
R1(config)# ip route 0.0.0.0 0.0.0.0 172.16.2.2
```

```
R1(config)# ipv6 route ::/0 2001:db8:acad:2::2
```
# 15.3.3 Verify a Default Static Route
**Verify IPv4 Default Static Route**

The **show ip route static** command output from R1 displays the contents of the static routes in the routing table. Note the asterisk (*) next to the route with code ‘S’. As displayed in the codes table in the **show ip route** output, the asterisk indicates that this static route is a candidate default route, which is why it is selected as the Gateway of Last Resort.