# 15.4.1 Floating Static Routes
Another type of static route is a floating static route. Floating static routes are static routes that are used to provide a backup path to a primary static or dynamic route, in the event of a link failure. The floating static route is only used when the primary route is not available.

To accomplish this, the floating static route is configured with a higher administrative distance than the primary route. The administrative distance represents the trustworthiness of a route. If multiple paths to the destination exist, the router will choose the path with the lowest administrative distance.

By default, static routes have an administrative distance of 1, making them preferable to routes learned from dynamic routing protocols. For example, the administrative distances of some common interior gateway dynamic routing protocols are:

- EIGRP = 90
- OSPF = 110
- IS-IS = 115
It uses the distance parameter in the **ip route** global configuration command.
# 15.4.2 Configure IPv4 and IPv6 Floating Static Routes
IP floating static routes are configured by using the **distance** argument to specify an administrative distance. If no administrative distance is configured, the default value (1) is used.

The **show ip route** and **show ipv6 route** output verifies that the default routes are installed in the routing table. Note that the IPv4 floating static route is not present in the routing table.
Use the **show run** command to verify that floating static routes are in the configuration.