# 15.5.1 Host Routes
A host route is an IPv4 address with a 32-bit mask, or an IPv6 address with a 128-bit mask. The following shows the three ways a host route can be added to the routing table:

- Automatically installed when an IP address is configured on the router
- Configured as a static host route
- Host route automatically obtained through other methods
# 15.5.2 Automatically Installed Host Routes
Cisco IOS automatically installs a host route, also known as a local host route, when an interface address is configured on the router. A host route allows for a more efficient process for packets that are directed to the router itself, rather than for packet forwarding. This is in addition to the connected route, designated with a **C** in the routing table for the network address of the interface.

When an active interface on a router is configured with an IP address, a local host route is automatically added to the routing table. The local routes are marked with **L** in the output of the routing table.

# 15.5.3 Static Host Routes
A host route can be a manually configured static route to direct traffic to a specific destination device. The static route uses a destination IP address and a 255.255.255.255 (/32) mask for IPv4 host routes, and a /128 prefix length for IPv6 host routes.

# 15.5.4 Configure Static Host Routes
```
Branch(config)# ip route 209.165.200.238 255.255.255.255 198.51.100.2
Branch(config)# ipv6 route 2001:db8:acad:2::238/128 2001:db8:acad:1::2
Branch(config)# exit
Branch#
```
# 15.5.6 Configure IPv6 Static Host Route with Link-Local Next-Hop
For IPv6 static routes, the next-hop address can be the link-local address of the adjacent router. However, you must specify an interface type and an interface number when using a link-local address as the next hop, as shown in the example. First, the original IPv6 static host route is removed, then a fully specified route configured with the IPv6 address of the server and the IPv6 link-local address of the ISP router.

```
Branch(config)# no ipv6 route 2001:db8:acad:2::238/128 2001:db8:acad:1::2
Branch(config)# ipv6 route 2001:db8:acad:2::238/128 serial 0/1/0 fe80::2
Branch# show ipv6 route | begin ::
C   2001:DB8:ACAD:1::/64 [0/0]
     via Serial0/1/0, directly connected
L   2001:DB8:ACAD:1::1/128 [0/0]
     via Serial0/1/0, receive
S   2001:DB8:ACAD:2::238/128 [1/0]
     via FE80::2, Serial0/1/0
Branch#
```