# 7.1.1 LANs and WANs
|**Local Area Networks (LANs)**|**Wide Area Networks (WANs)**|
|---|---|
|LANs provide networking services within a small geographic area (i.e., home network, office network, building network, or campus network).|WANs provide networking services over large geographical areas (i.e., in and between cities, countries, and continents).|
|LANs are used to interconnect local computers, peripherals, and other devices.|WANs are used to interconnect remote users, networks, and sites.|
|A LAN is owned and managed by an organization or home user.|WANs are owned and managed by internet service, telephone, cable, and satellite providers.|
|Other than the network infrastructure costs, there is no fee to use a LAN.|WAN services are provided for a fee.|
|LANs provide high bandwidth speeds using wired Ethernet and Wi-Fi services.|WANs providers offer low to high bandwidth speeds, over long distances using complex physical networks.|
# 7.1.2 Private and Public WANs
WANs may be built by a variety of different types of organizations, as follows:

- An organization that wants to connect users in different locations
- An ISP that wants to connect customers to the internet
- An ISP or telecommunications that wants to interconnect ISPs

A private WAN is a connection that is dedicated to a single customer. This provides for the following:

- Guaranteed service level
- Consistent bandwidth
- Security

# 7.1.3 WAN Topologies
**Point-to-Point Topology**
Point-to-point links often involve dedicated, leased-line connections from the corporate edge point to the provider networks. A point-to-point connection involves a Layer 2 transport service through the service provider network. Packets sent from one site are delivered to the other site and vice versa. A point-to-point connection is transparent to the customer network. It seems as if there is a direct physical link between two endpoints.

**Hub-and-Spoke Topology**
A hub-and-spoke topology enables a single interface on the hub router to be shared by all spoke circuits. Spoke routers can be interconnected through the hub router using virtual circuits and routed subinterfaces. The figure displays a sample hub-and-spoke topology consisting of three spoke routers connecting to a hub router across a WAN cloud.
A hub-and-spoke topology is a single-homed topology. There is only one hub router and all communication must go through it. Therefore, spoke routers can only communicate with each other through the hub router. Consequently, the hub router represents a single point of failure. If it fails, inter-spoke communication also fails.

**Dual-homed Topology**
A dual-homed topology provides redundancy. Two hub routers are dual-homed and redundantly attached to three spoke routers across a WAN cloud.
The advantage of dual-homed topologies is that they offer enhanced network redundancy, load balancing, distributed computing and processing, and the ability to implement backup service provider connections.

**Fully Meshed Topology**
A fully meshed topology uses multiple virtual circuits to connect all sites.

**Partially Meshed Topology**
A partially meshed topology connects many but not all sites.

# 7.1.4 Carrier Connections
Another aspect of WAN design is how an organization connects to the internet. An organization usually signs a service level agreement (SLA) with a service provider. The SLA outlines the expected services relating to the reliability and availability of the connection. The service provider may or may not be the actual carrier. A carrier owns and maintains the physical connection and equipment between the provider and the customer. Typically, an organization will choose either a single-carrier or dual-carrier WAN connection.
**Single-Carrier WAN Connection**
A single-carrier connection is when an organization connects to only one service provider.
**Dual-Carrier WAN Connection**
A dual-carrier connection provides redundancy and increases network availability. The organization negotiates separate SLAs with two different service providers. The organization should ensure that the two providers each use a different carrier. Although more expensive to implement, the second connection can be used for redundancy as a backup link. It could also be used to improve network performance and load balance internet traffic.
