# 11.3.1 DHCP Attack Review
he goal of a DHCP starvation attack is to create a Denial of Service (DoS) for connecting clients. DHCP starvation attacks require an attack tool such as Gobbler. Recall that DHCP starvation attacks can be effectively mitigated by using port security because Gobbler uses a unique source MAC address for each DHCP request sent.

However, mitigating DHCP spoofing attacks requires more protection. Gobbler could be configured to use the actual interface MAC address as the source Ethernet address, but specify a different Ethernet address in the DHCP payload. This would render port security ineffective because the source MAC address would be legitimate.

DHCP spoofing attacks can be mitigated by using DHCP snooping on trusted ports.

# 11.3.2 DHCP Snooping 
DHCP snooping does not rely on source MAC addresses. Instead, DHCP snooping determines whether DHCP messages are from an administratively configured trusted or untrusted source. It then filters DHCP messages and rate-limits DHCP traffic from untrusted sources.

Devices under your administrative control, such as switches, routers, and servers, are trusted sources. Any device beyond the firewall or outside your network is an untrusted source. In addition, all access ports are generally treated as untrusted sources.

A DHCP table is built that includes the source MAC address of a device on an untrusted port and the IP address assigned by the DHCP server to that device. The MAC address and IP address are bound together. Therefore, this table is called the DHCP snooping binding table.

# 11.3.3 Steps to Implement DHCP Snooping
**Step 1**: Enable DHCP snooping by using the **ip dhcp snooping** global configuration command.

**Step 2**: On trusted ports, use the **ip dhcp snooping trust** interface configuration command.

**Step 3**: Limit the number of DHCP discovery messages that can be received per second o untrusted ports by using the **ip dhcp snooping limit rate _number_** interface configuration command.

**Step 4**: Enabled DHCP snooping by VLAN, or by range of VLANs, by using the **ip dhcp snooping** vlan global configuration command.

# 11.3.4 DHCP Snooping Configuration Example
Use the **show ip dhcp snooping** privileged EXEC command to verify DHCP snooping and **show ip dhcp snooping binding** to view the clients that have received DHCP information.

**Note:** DHCP snooping is also required by Dynamic ARP Inspection (DAI).