# 11.4.1 Dynamic ARP Inspection
Dynamic ARP inspection (DAI) requires DHCP snooping and helps prevent ARP attacks by:

- Not relaying invalid or gratuitous ARP Requests out to other ports in the same VLAN.
- Intercepting all ARP Requests and Replies on untrusted ports.
- Verifying each intercepted packet for a valid IP-to-MAC binding.
- Dropping and logging ARP Requests coming from invalid sources to prevent ARP poisoning.
- Error-disabling the interface if the configured DAI number of ARP packets is exceeded.
# 11.4.2 DAI Implementation Guidelines
To mitigate the chances of ARP spoofing and ARP poisoning, follow these DAI implementation guidelines:

- Enable DHCP snooping globally.
- Enable DHCP snooping on selected VLANs.
- Enable DAI on selected VLANs.
- Configure trusted interfaces for DHCP snooping and ARP inspection.

It is generally advisable to configure all access switch ports as untrusted and to configure all uplink ports that are connected to other switches as trusted.

# 11.4.3 DAI Configuration Example
```
S1(config)# ip dhcp snooping
S1(config)# ip dhcp snooping vlan 10
S1(config)# ip arp inspection vlan 10
S1(config)# interface fa0/24
S1(config-if)# ip dhcp snooping trust
S1(config-if)# ip arp inspection trust
```
DAI can also be configured to check for both destination or source MAC and IP addresses:

- **Destination MAC** - Checks the destination MAC address in the Ethernet header against the target MAC address in ARP body.
- **Source MAC** - Checks the source MAC address in the Ethernet header against the sender MAC address in the ARP body.
- **IP address** - Checks the ARP body for invalid and unexpected IP addresses including addresses 0.0.0.0, 255.255.255.255, and all IP multicast addresses.
The **ip arp inspection validate {\[src-mac] \[dst-mac] \[ip]}** global configuration command is used to configure DAI to drop ARP packets when the IP addresses are invalid. It can be used when the MAC addresses in the body of the ARP packets do not match the addresses that are specified in the Ethernet header. Notice in the following example how only one command can be configured. Therefore, entering multiple **ip arp inspection validate** commands overwrites the previous command. To include more than one validation method, enter them on the same command line as shown and verified in the following output.
```
S1(config)# ip arp inspection validate ?
dst-mac  Validate destination MAC address
  ip       Validate IP addresses
  src-mac  Validate source MAC address
S1(config)# ip arp inspection validate src-mac
S1(config)# ip arp inspection validate dst-mac
S1(config)# ip arp inspection validate ip
S1(config)# do show run | include validate
ip arp inspection validate ip 
S1(config)# ip arp inspection validate src-mac dst-mac ip
S1(config)# do show run | include validate
ip arp inspection validate src-mac dst-mac ip 
S1(config)#
```