# 11.5.1 PortFast and BPDU Guard
Recall that network attackers can manipulate the Spanning Tree Protocol (STP) to conduct an attack by spoofing the root bridge and changing the topology of a network. To mitigate Spanning Tree Protocol (STP) manipulation attacks, use PortFast and Bridge Protocol Data Unit (BPDU) Guard:

- **PortFast** - PortFast immediately brings an interface configured as an access port to the forwarding state from a blocking state, bypassing the listening and learning states. Apply to all end-user ports. PortFast should only be configured on ports attached to end devices.
- **BPDU Guard** - BPDU guard immediately error disables a port that receives a BPDU. Like PortFast, BPDU guard should only be configured on interfaces attached to end devices.
# 11.5.2 Configure PortFast
PortFast bypasses the STP listening and learning states to minimize the time that access ports must wait for STP to converge. If PortFast is enabled on a port connecting to another switch, there is a risk of creating a spanning-tree loop.

PortFast can be enabled on an interface by using the **spanning-tree portfast** interface configuration command. Alternatively, Portfast can be configured globally on all access ports by using the **spanning-tree portfast default** global configuration command.

To verify whether PortFast is enabled globally you can use either the **show running-config | begin span** command or the **show spanning-tree summary** command. To verify if PortFast is enabled an interface, use the **show running-config interface** _type/number_ command. The **show** **spanning-tree interface** _type/number_ **detail** command can also be used for verification.

# 11.5.3 Configure BPDU Guard
Even though PortFast is enabled, the interface will still listen for BPDUs. Unexpected BPDUs might be accidental, or part of an unauthorized attempt to add a switch to the network.

If any BPDUs are received on a BPDU Guard enabled port, that port is put into error-disabled state. This means the port is shut down and must be manually re-enabled or automatically recovered through the **errdisable recovery cause bpduguard** global command.

BPDU Guard can be enabled on a port by using the **spanning-tree bpduguard enable** interface configuration command. Alternatively, Use the **spanning-tree portfast bpduguard default** global configuration command to globally enable BPDU guard on all PortFast-enabled ports.

To display information about the state of spanning tree, use the **show spanning-tree summary** command.

**Note:** Always enable BPDU Guard on all PortFast-enabled ports.

