# 2.1.1 Switching in Networking
There are two terms associated with frames entering and leaving an interface:
- Ingress: This is used to describe the port where a frame enters the device.
- Egress: This is used to describe the port that frames will use when leaving the device.
A LAN switch maintains a table that is referenced when forwarding traffic through the switch. The only intelligence of a LAN switch is its ability to use its table to forward traffic. A LAN switch forwards traffic based on the ingress port and the destination MAC address of an Ethernet frame.
# 2.1.2 The Switch MAC Address Table
LAN switches determine how to handle incoming data by maintaining the MAC address table.
The switch populates the MAC Address table by recording the source MAC address of each device connected.
# 2.1.3 The Switch Learn and Forward Method
**Step 1. Learn**
Every frame that enter a switch is checked for new information to learn.
- If the source MAC address does not exist in the table, the MAC address and incoming port number are added to the table.
- If the source MAC address does exist, the switch updates the refresh timer for that entry. 5 minutes by default.

**Step 2. Forward**
If the destination is unicast, the switch will look for a match MAC address in its table.
- If the destination MAC address is in the table, it will forward the frame out of the specified port.
- If the destination MAC address is not in the table, the switch will forward the frame out all ports except the incoming port. This is called an unknown unicast. If the destination is a broadcast or a multicast MAC address, the frame is also flooded out all ports except the incoming port.

# 2.1.5 Switching Forwarding Methods
The application-specific-integrated circuits (ASICs) is responsible for forwarding decisions. ASICs reduce the frame-handling time.
Layer 2 switches use one of two methods to switch frames:
- **Store-and-forward switching**: This method makes a forwarding decision on a frame after if has received the entire frame and checked the frame for errors using a mathematical error-checking mechanism known as a cyclic redundancy check (CRC). Store-and-forward switching is Cisco's primary LAN switching method.
- **Cut-through switching** - This method begins the forward process after the destination MAC address of an incoming frame and the egress port have been determined.
# 2.1.6 Store-and-Forward Switching
- **Error Checking** - After receiving the frame, the switch compares the FCS value against its own FCS calculation.
- **Automatic buffering**: The ingress port buffering process provides flexibility to support any mix of Ethernet speeds. With any mismatch in speed between the ingress and egress ports, the switch stores the entire frame in a buffer.
# 2.1.7 Cut-Through Switching
Cut-through switching method may forward invalid frames because no FCS check is performed.
The switch does not have to wait for the rest of the frame to enter the ingress port before making its forwarding decision.

**Fragment free** switching is a modified method of cut-through with better error checking.