# 21.1.1 Securing Communications

These are the four elements of secure communications:

- **Data Integrity** - Guarantees that the message was not altered. Any changes to data in transit will be detected. Integrity is ensured by implementing either of the Secure Hash Algorithms (SHA-2 or SHA-3). The MD5 message digest algorithm is still widely in use, however it is inherently insecure and creates vulnerabilities in a network. The use of MD5 should be avoided.
- **Origin Authentication** - Guarantees that the message is not a forgery and does actually come from whom it states. Many modern networks ensure authentication with algorithms such as hash-based message authentication code (HMAC).
- **Data Confidentiality** - Guarantees that only authorized users can read the message. If the message is intercepted, it cannot be deciphered within a reasonable amount of time. Data confidentiality is implemented using symmetric and asymmetric encryption algorithms.
- **Data Non-Repudiation** - Guarantees that the sender cannot repudiate, or refute, the validity of a message sent. Nonrepudiation relies on the fact that only the sender has the unique characteristics or signature for how that message is treated.
# 21.1.2 Cryptographic Hash Functions
Hashes are used to verify and ensure data integrity. Hashing is based on a one-way mathematical function that is relatively easy to compute, but significantly harder to reverse.

With hash functions, it is computationally infeasible for two different sets of data to come up with the same hash output. Every time the data is changed or altered, the hash value also changes. Because of this, cryptographic hash values are often called digital fingerprints. They can be used to detect duplicate data files, file version changes, and similar applications. These values are used to guard against an accidental or intentional change to the data, or accidental data corruption.

# 21.1.3 Cryptographic Hash Operation
Mathematically, the equation **_h= H(x)_** is used to explain how a hash algorithm operates.
A cryptographic hash function should have the following properties:

- The input can be any length.
- The output has a fixed length.
- H(x) is relatively easy to compute for any given x.
- H(x) is one way and not reversible.
- H(x) is collision free, meaning that two different input values will result in different hash values.

If a hash function is hard to invert, it is considered a one-way hash. Hard to invert means that given a hash value of _h_, it is computationally infeasible to find an input for x such that _h=H(x)._


# 21.1.4 MD5 and SHA
There are four well-known hash functions:

- **MD5 with 128-bit digest** - Developed by Ron Rivest and used in a variety of internet applications, MD5 is a one-way function that produces a 128-bit hashed message. MD5 is considered to be a legacy algorithm and should be avoided and used only when no better alternatives are available. It is recommended that SHA-2 or SHA-3 be used instead.
- **SHA-1** - Developed by the U.S. National Security Agency (NSA) in 1995. It is very similar to the MD5 hash functions. Several versions exist. SHA-1 creates a 160-bit hashed message and is slightly slower than MD5. SHA-1 has known flaws and is a legacy algorithm.
- **SHA-2** - Developed by the NSA. It includes SHA-224 (224 bit), SHA-256 (256 bit), SHA-384 (384 bit), and SHA-512 (512 bit). If you are using SHA-2, then the SHA-256, SHA-384, and SHA-512 algorithms should be used whenever possible.
- **SHA-3** - SHA-3 is the newest hashing algorithm and was introduced by NIST as an alternative and eventual replacement for the SHA-2 family of hashing algorithms. SHA-3 includes SHA3-224 (224 bit), SHA3-256 (256 bit), SHA3-384 (384 bit), and SHA3-512 (512 bit). The SHA-3 family are next-generation algorithms and should be used whenever possible.
Hashing is vulnerable to man-in-the-middle attacks and does not provide security to transmitted data. To provide integrity and origin authentication, something more is required.

**Note:** Hashing algorithms only protect against accidental changes and does not protect the data from changes deliberately made by a threat actor.

# 21.1.5 Origin Authentication
To add origin authentication and integrity assurance, use a keyed-hash message authentication code (HMAC). HMAC uses an additional secret key as input to the hash function.

**Note:** Other Message Authentication Code (MAC) methods are also used. However, HMAC is used in many systems including SSL, IPsec, and SSH.

**HMAC Hashing Algorithm**
An HMAC is calculated using any cryptographic algorithm that combines a cryptographic hash function with a secret key. Hash functions are the basis of the protection mechanism of HMACs.

Only the sender and the receiver know the secret key, and the output of the hash function now depends on the input data and the secret key. Only parties who have access to that secret key can compute the digest of an HMAC function. This defeats man-in-the-middle attacks and provides authentication of the data origin.

If two parties share a secret key and use HMAC functions for authentication, a properly constructed HMAC digest of a message that a party has received indicates that the other party was the originator of the message. This is because the other party possesses the secret key.