# 21.5.1 PKI Applications
Where can PKI be used by an enterprise? The following provides a short list of common uses of PKIs:

- SSL/TLS certificate-based peer authentication
- Secure network traffic using IPsec VPNs
- HTTPS Web traffic
- Control access to the network using 802.1x authentication
- Secure email using the S/MIME protocol
- Secure instant messaging
- Approve and authorize applications with Code Signing
- Protect user data with the Encryption File System (EFS)
- Implement two-factor authentication with smart cards
- Securing USB storage devices
# 21.5.2 Encrypted Network Transactions

A security analyst must be able to recognize and solve potential problems related to permitting PKI-related solutions on the enterprise network.
Threat actors can use SSL/TLS to introduce regulatory compliance violations, viruses, malware, data loss, and intrusion attempts in a network.

Other SSL/TLS-related issues may be associated with validating the certificate of a web server. When this occurs, web browsers will display a security warning. PKI-related issues that are associated with security warnings include:

- **Validity date range** - The X.509v3 certificates specify “not before” and “not after” dates. If the current date is outside the range, the web browser displays a message. Expired certificates may simply be the result of administrator oversight, but they may also reflect more serious conditions.
- **Signature validation error** - If a browser cannot validate the signature on the certificate, there is no assurance that the public key in the certificate is authentic. Signature validation will fail if the root certificate of the CA hierarchy is not available in the browser’s certificate store.

#  21.5.3 Encryption and Security Monitoring
Network monitoring becomes more challenging when packets are encrypted. However, security analysts must be aware of those challenges and address them as best as possible. For instance, when site-to-site VPNs are used, the IPS should be positioned so it can monitor unencrypted traffic.

However, the increased use of HTTPS in the enterprise network introduces new challenges. Since HTTPS introduces end-to-end encrypted HTTP traffic (via TLS/SSL), it is not as easy to peek into user traffic.

Security analysts must know how to circumvent and solve these issues. Here is a list of some of the things that a security analyst could do:

- Configure rules to distinguish between SSL and non-SSL traffic, HTTPS and non-HTTPS SSL traffic.
- Enhance security through server certificate validation using CRLs and OCSP.
- Implement antimalware protection and URL filtering of HTTPS content.
- Deploy a Cisco SSL Appliance to decrypt SSL traffic and send it to intrusion prevention system (IPS) appliances to identify risks normally hidden by SSL.