# 13.1.1 Threat, Vulnerability, and Risk

|Term|Explanation|
|---|---|
|**Threat**|A potential danger to an asset such as data or the network itself.|
|**Vulnerability**|A weakness in a system or its design that could be exploited by a threat.|
|**Attack surface**|An attack surface is the total sum of the vulnerabilities in a given system that are accessible to an attacker. The attack surface describes different points where an attacker could get into a system, and where they could get data out of the system. For example, your operating system and web browser could both need security patches. They are each vulnerable to attacks and are exposed on the network or the internet. Together, they create an attack surface that the threat actor can exploit.|
|**Exploit**|The mechanism that is used to leverage a vulnerability to compromise an asset. Exploits may be remote or local. A remote exploit is one that works over the network without any prior access to the target system. The attacker does not need an account in the end system to exploit the vulnerability. In a local exploit, the threat actor has some type of user or administrative access to the end system. A local exploit does not necessarily mean that the attacker has physical access to the end system.|
|**Risk**|The likelihood that a particular threat will exploit a particular vulnerability of an asset and result in an undesirable consequence.|
Risk management is the process that balances the operational costs of providing protective measures with the gains achieved by protecting the asset. There are four common ways to manage risk, as shown in the table:

|Risk Management Strategy|Explanation|
|---|---|
|**Risk acceptance**|This is when the cost of risk management options outweighs the cost of the risk itself. The risk is accepted, and no action is taken.|
|**Risk avoidance**|This means avoiding any exposure to the risk by eliminating the activity or device that presents the risk. By eliminating an activity to avoid risk, any benefits that are possible from the activity are also lost.|
|**Risk reduction**|This reduces exposure to risk or reducing the impact of risk by taking action to decrease the risk. It is the most commonly used risk mitigation strategy. This strategy requires careful evaluation of the costs of loss, the mitigation strategy, and the benefits gained from the operation or activity that is at risk.|
|**Risk transfer**|Some or all of the risk is transferred to a willing third party such as an insurance company.|

Other commonly used network security terms include:

- **Countermeasure** – The actions that are taken to protect assets by mitigating a threat or reducing risk.
- **Impact** – The potential damage to the organization that is caused by the threat.
# 13.1.2 Hacker vs. Threat Actor
As we know, “hacker” is a common term used to describe a threat actor. However, the term “hacker” has a variety of meanings, as follows:

- A clever programmer capable of developing new programs and coding changes to existing programs to make them more efficient.
- A network professional that uses sophisticated programming skills to ensure that networks are not vulnerable to attack.
- A person who tries to gain unauthorized access to devices on the internet.
- An individual who run programs to prevent or slow network access to a large number of users, or corrupt or wipe out data on servers.

1. White hat hackers are ethical hackers who use their programming skills for good, ethical, and legal purposes. They may perform network penetration tests in an attempt to compromise networks and systems by using their knowledge of computer security systems to discover network vulnerabilities. Security vulnerabilities are reported to developers and security personnel who attempt to fix the vulnerability before it can be exploited. Some organizations award prizes or bounties to white hat hackers when they provide information that helps to identify vulnerabilities.
2. Grey hat hackers are individuals who commit crimes and do arguably unethical things, but not for personal gain or to cause damage. An example would be someone who compromises a network without permission and then discloses the vulnerability publicly. Grey hat hackers may disclose a vulnerability to the affected organization after having compromised their network. This allows the organization to fix the problem.
3. Black hat hackers are unethical criminals who violate computer and network security for personal gain, or for malicious reasons, such as attacking networks. Black hat hackers exploit vulnerabilities to compromise computer and network systems.
# 13.1.3 Evolution of Threat Actors
Hacking started in the 1960s with phone freaking, or phreaking, which refers to using various audio frequencies to manipulate phone systems. At that time, telephone switches used various tones, or tone dialing, to indicate different functions. Early threat actors realized that by mimicking a tone using a whistle, they could exploit the phone switches to make free long-distance calls.

In the mid-1980s, computer dial-up modems were used to connect computers to networks. Threat actors wrote “war dialing” programs which dialed each telephone number in a given area in search of computers, bulletin board systems, and fax machines. When a phone number was found, password-cracking programs were used to gain access. Since then, general threat actor profiles and motives have changed quite a bit.

There are many different types of threat actors.

**Script Kiddies**
Script kiddies emerged in the 1990s and refers to teenagers or inexperienced threat actors running existing scripts, tools, and exploits, to cause harm, but typically not for profit.
**Vulnerability Brokers**
Vulnerability brokers typically refers to grey hat hackers who attempt to discover exploits and report them to vendors, sometimes for prizes or rewards.
**Hacktivists**
Hacktivists is a term that refers to grey hat hackers who rally and protest against different political and social ideas. Hacktivists publicly protest against organizations or governments by posting articles, videos, leaking sensitive information, and performing distributed denial of service (DDoS) attacks.
**Cybercriminals**
Cybercriminal is a term for black hat hackers who are either self-employed or working for large cybercrime organizations. Each year, cyber criminals are responsible for stealing billions of dollars from consumers and businesses.
**State-Sponsored**
State-Sponsored hackers are threat actors who steal government secrets, gather intelligence, and sabotage networks of foreign governments, terrorist groups, and corporations. Most countries in the world participate to some degree in state-sponsored hacking. Depending on a person’s perspective, these are either white hat or black hat hackers.
# 13.1.4 Cybercriminals
Cybercriminals are threat actors who are motivated to make money using any means necessary. While sometimes cybercriminals work independently, they are more often financed and sponsored by criminal organizations. It is estimated that globally, cybercriminals steal billions of dollars from consumers and businesses every year.

Cybercriminals operate in an underground economy where they buy, sell, and trade exploits and tools. They also buy and sell the personal information and intellectual property that they steal from victims. Cybercriminals target small businesses and consumers, as well as large enterprises and industries.
# 13.1.5 Cybersecurity Tasks
Organizations must take action and protect their assets, users, and customers. They must develop and practice cybersecurity tasks such as those listed in the figure.
#  13.1.6 Cyber Threat Indicators
Many network attacks can be prevented by sharing information about **indicators of compromise** (IOC). Each attack has unique identifiable attributes. Indicators of compromise are the evidence that an attack has occurred. IOCs can be features that identify malware files, IP addresses of servers that are used in attacks, filenames, and characteristic changes made to end system software, among others. IOCs help cybersecurity personnel identify what has happened in an attack and develop defenses against the attack.

**Indicators of attack** (IOA) focus more on the motivation behind an attack and the potential means by which threat actors have, or will, compromise vulnerabilities to gain access to assets. IOAs are concerned with the strategies that are used by attackers. For this reason, rather than informing response to a single threat, IOAs can help generate a proactive security approach. This is because strategies can be reused in multiple contexts and multiple attacks. Defending against a strategy can therefore prevent future attacks that utilize the same, or similar strategy.
# 13.1.7 Threat Sharing and Building Cybersecurity Awareness
Governments are now actively promoting cybersecurity. For instance, the US Cybersecurity Infrastructure and Security Agency (CISA) is leading efforts to automate the sharing of cybersecurity information with public and private organizations at no cost. CISA use a system called Automated Indicator Sharing (AIS). AIS enables the sharing of attack indicators between the US government and the private sector as soon as threats are verified. CISA offers many resources that help to limit the size of the United States attack surface.

The CISA and the National Cyber Security Alliance (NCSA) promote cybersecurity to all users. For example, they have an annual campaign in every October called “National Cybersecurity Awareness Month” (NCASM). This campaign was developed to promote and raise awareness about cybersecurity.

The theme for the NCASM for 2019 was “**Own IT. Secure IT. Protect IT.**” This campaign encouraged all citizens to be safer and more personally accountable for using security best practices online. The campaign provides material on a wide variety of security topics including:

- Social media safety
- Updating privacy settings
- Awareness of device app security
- Keeping software up-to-date
- Safe online shopping
- Wi-Fi safety
- Protecting customer data