# 13.2.2 WLC Topology
The access point (AP) is a controller-based AP as opposed to an autonomous AP. Recall that controller-based APs require no initial configuration and are often called lightweight APs (LAPs). LAPs use the Lightweight Access Point Protocol (LWAPP) to communicate with a WLAN controller (WLC). Controller-based APs are useful in situations where many APs are required in the network. As more APs are added, each AP is automatically configured and managed by the WLC.

# 13.2.3 Log in to the WLC
Configuring a wireless LAN controller (WLC) is not that much different from configuring a wireless router. The big difference is that a WLC controls APs and provides more services and management capabilities.

# 13.2.4 View AP Information
# 13.2.5 Advanced Settings
Most WLC will come with some basic settings and menus that users can quickly access to implement a variety of common configurations. However, as a network administrator, you will typically access the advanced settings.
# 13.2.6 Configure a WLAN
Wireless LAN Controllers have ports and interfaces. Ports are the sockets for the physical connections to the wired network. They resemble switch ports. Interfaces are virtual. They are created in software and are very similar to VLAN interfaces. In fact, each interface that will carry traffic from a WLAN is configured on the WLC as a different VLAN.

Basic WLAN configuration on the WLC includes the following steps:

1. Create the WLAN
2. Apply and Enable the WLAN
3. Select the Interface
4. Secure the WLAN
5. Verify the WLAN is Operational
6. Monitor the WLAN
7. View Wireless Client Information