# 11.1.2 The Need to Scale the Network
A network must support the exchange of various types of network traffic, including data files, email, IP telephony, and video applications for multiple business units. All enterprise networks must be able to do the following:

- Support critical applications
- Support converged network traffic
- Support diverse business needs
- Provide centralized administrative control

The LAN is the networking infrastructure that provides access to network communication services and resources for end users and devices. The end users and devices may be spread over a single floor or building. You create a campus network by interconnecting a group of LANs that are spread over a small geographic area. Campus network designs include small networks that use a single LAN switch, up to very large networks with thousands of connections.

# 11.1.3 Borderless Switched Networks
With the increasing demands of the converged network, the network must be developed with an architectural approach that embeds intelligence, simplifies operations, and is scalable to meet future demands. One of the more recent developments in network design is the Cisco Borderless Network.

The Cisco Borderless Network is a network architecture that combines innovation and design. It allows organizations to support a borderless network that can connect anyone, anywhere, anytime, on any device; securely, reliably, and seamlessly. This architecture is designed to address IT and business challenges, such as supporting the converged network and changing work patterns.

# 11.1.4 Hierarchy in the Borderless Switched Network
Creating a borderless switched network requires that sound network design principles are used to ensure maximum availability, flexibility, security, and manageability. The borderless switched network must deliver on current requirements and future required services and technologies. Borderless switched network design guidelines are built upon the following principles:

- **Hierarchical** – The design facilitates understanding the role of each device at every tier, simplifies deployment, operation, and management, and reduces fault domains at every tier.
- **Modularity** – The design allows seamless network expansion and integrated service enablement on an on-demand basis.
- **Resiliency** – The design satisfies user expectations for keeping the network always on.
- **Flexibility** – The design allows intelligent traffic load sharing by using all network resources.
The three critical layers within these tiered designs are the access, distribution, and core layers. Each layer can be seen as a well-defined, structured module with specific roles and functions in the campus network. Introducing modularity into the campus hierarchical design further ensures that the campus network remains resilient and flexible enough to provide critical network services. Modularity also helps to allow for growth and changes that occur over time.

# 11.1.5 Access, Distribution, and Core Layer Functions
**Access Layer**

The access layer represents the network edge, where traffic enters or exits the campus network. Traditionally, the primary function of an access layer switch is to provide network access to the user. Access layer switches connect to distribution layer switches, which implement network foundation technologies such as routing, quality of service, and security.

**Distribution Layer**

The distribution layer interfaces between the access layer and the core layer to provide many important functions, including the following:

- Aggregating large-scale wiring closet networks
- Aggregating Layer 2 broadcast domains and Layer 3 routing boundaries
- Providing intelligent switching, routing, and network access policy functions to access the rest of the network
- Providing high availability through redundant distribution layer switches to the end user, and equal cost paths to the core
- Providing differentiated services to various classes of service applications at the edge of the network

**Core Layer**

The core layer is the network backbone. It connects several layers of the campus network. The core layer serves as the aggregator for all of the distribution layer devices and ties the campus together with the rest of the network. The primary purpose of the core layer is to provide fault isolation and high-speed backbone connectivity.


# 11.1.7 Role of Switched Networks

The role of switched networks has evolved dramatically in the last two decades. It was not long ago that flat Layer 2 switched networks were the norm. Flat Layer 2 switched networks relied on the Ethernet and the widespread use of hub repeaters to propagate LAN traffic throughout an organization.

A switched LAN allows additional flexibility, traffic management, quality of service, and security. It also affords support for wireless networking and connectivity, and support for other technologies such as IP telephone and mobility services.