# 11.2.1 Design for Scalability
To support a large, medium or small network, the network designer must develop a strategy to enable the network to be available and to scale effectively and easily. Included in a basic network design strategy are the following recommendations:

- Use expandable, modular equipment, or clustered devices that can be easily upgraded to increase capabilities. Device modules can be added to the existing equipment to support new features and devices without requiring major equipment upgrades. Some devices can be integrated in a cluster to act as one device to simplify management and configuration.
- Design a hierarchical network to include modules that can be added, upgraded, and modified, as necessary, without affecting the design of the other functional areas of the network. For example, creating a separate access layer that can be expanded without affecting the distribution and core layers of the campus network.
- Create an IPv4 and IPv6 address strategy that is hierarchical. Careful address planning eliminates the need to re-address the network to support additional users and services.
- Choose routers or multilayer switches to limit broadcasts and filter other undesirable traffic from the network. Use Layer 3 devices to filter and reduce traffic to the network core.

**Redundant Links**

Implement redundant links in the network between critical devices and between access layer and core layer devices.

**Multiple Links**

Implement multiple links between equipment, with either link aggregation (EtherChannel) or equal cost load balancing, to increase bandwidth. Combining multiple Ethernet links into a single, load-balanced EtherChannel configuration increases available bandwidth. EtherChannel implementations can be used when budget restrictions prohibit purchasing high-speed interfaces and fiber runs.

**Scalable Routing Protocol**

Use a scalable routing protocol and implement features within that routing protocol to isolate routing updates and minimize the size of the routing table.

**Wireless Connectivity**

Implement wireless connectivity to allow for mobility and expansion.

# 11.2.2 Plan for Redundancy
One method of implementing redundancy is by installing duplicate equipment and providing failover services for critical devices.

Another method of implementing redundancy is redundant paths. edundant paths in a switched network support high availability. However, due to the operation of switches, redundant paths in a switched Ethernet network may cause logical Layer 2 loops. For this reason, Spanning Tree Protocol (STP) is required.

Using Layer 3 in the backbone is another way to implement redundancy without the need for STP at Layer 2. Layer 3 also provides best path selection and faster convergence during failover.

# 11.2.3 Reduce Failure Domain Size
The use of redundant links and reliable enterprise-class equipment minimize the chance of disruption in a network. Smaller failure domains reduce the impact of a failure on company productivity. They also simplify the troubleshooting process, thereby, shortening the downtime for all users.

**Limiting the Size of Failure Domains**

Because a failure at the core layer of a network can have a potentially large impact, the network designer often concentrates on efforts to prevent failures. These efforts can greatly increase the cost of implementing the network. In the hierarchical design model, it is easiest and usually least expensive to control the size of a failure domain in the distribution layer. In the distribution layer, network errors can be contained to a smaller area; thus, affecting fewer users. When using Layer 3 devices at the distribution layer, every router functions as a gateway for a limited number of access layer users.

**Switch Block Deployment**
Routers, or multilayer switches, are usually deployed in pairs, with access layer switches evenly divided between them. This configuration is referred to as a building, or departmental, switch block. Each switch block acts independently of the others. As a result, the failure of a single device does not cause the network to go down. Even the failure of an entire switch block does not affect a significant number of end users.

# 11.2.4 Increase Bandwidth

In hierarchical network design, some links between access and distribution switches may need to process a greater amount of traffic than other links. As traffic from multiple links converges onto a single, outgoing link, it is possible for that link to become a bottleneck. Link aggregation, such as EtherChannel, allows an administrator to increase the amount of bandwidth between devices by creating one logical link made up of several physical links.

# 11.2.5 Expand the Access Layer
The network must be designed to be able to expand network access to individuals and devices, as needed. An increasingly important option for extending access layer connectivity is through wireless. Providing wireless connectivity offers many advantages, such as increased flexibility, reduced costs, and the ability to grow and adapt to changing network and business requirements.

To communicate wirelessly, end devices require a wireless NIC that incorporates a radio transmitter/receiver and the required software driver to make it operational. Additionally, a wireless router or a wireless access point (AP) is required for users to connect.

# 11.2.6 Tune Routing Protocols

Advanced routing protocols, such as Open Shortest Path First (OSPF), are used in large networks.

OSPF is a link-state routing protocol.  OSPF works well for larger hierarchical networks where fast convergence is important. OSPF routers establish and maintain neighbor adjacencies with other connected OSPF routers. OSPF routers synchronize their link-state database. When a network change occurs, link-state updates are sent, informing other OSPF routers of the change and establishing a new best path, if one is available.