# 11.4.1 Router Requirements
Routers also serve other beneficial functions as follows:

- They provide broadcast containment by limiting broadcasts to the local network.
- They interconnect geographically separated locations.
- The group users logically by application or department within a company, who have command needs or require access to the same resources.
- They provide enhanced security by filtering unwanted traffic through access control lists.
# 11.4.2 Cisco Routers

**Branch Routers**
Branch routers, optimize branch services on a single platform while delivering an optimal application experience across branch and WAN infrastructures. Maximizing service availability at the branch requires networks designed for 24x7x365 uptime. Highly available branch networks must ensure fast recovery from typical faults, while minimizing or eliminating the impact on service, and provide simple network configuration and management.

**Network Edge Routers**
Network edge routers, enable the network edge to deliver high-performance, highly secure, and reliable services that unite campus, data center, and branch networks. Customers expect a high-quality media experience and more types of content than ever before. Customers want interactivity, personalization, mobility, and control for all content. Customers also want to access content anytime and anyplace they choose, over any device, whether at home, at work, or on the go. Network edge routers must deliver enhanced quality of service and nonstop video and mobile capabilities.

**Service Provider Routers**
Service provider routers, deliver end-to-end scalable solutions and subscriber-aware services. Operators must optimize operations, reduce expenses, and improve scalability and flexibility, to deliver next-generation internet experiences across all devices and locations. These systems are designed to simplify and enhance the operation and deployment of service-delivery networks.

**Industrial**
Industrial routers, , are designed to provide enterprise-class features in rugged and harsh environments. Their compact, modular, ruggedized design is excellent for mission-critical applications.

# 11.4.3 Router Form Factors

**Cisco 900 Series**
This is a small branch office router. It combines WAN, switching, security, and advanced connectivity options in a compact, fanless platform for small and medium-sized businesses.

**Cisco ASR 9000 and 1000 Series Aggregation Services Routers**
These routers provide density and resiliency with programmability, for a scalable network edge.

**Cisco Network Convergence System 5500 Series Routers**
These routers are designed to efficiently scale between large data centers and large enterprise networks, web, and service provider WAN and aggregation networks.

**Cisco 800 Industrial Integrated Services Router**
This router is compact and designed for harsh environments.

Routers can also be categorized as fixed configuration or modular. With the fixed configuration, the desired router interfaces are built-in. Modular routers come with multiple slots that allow a network administrator to change the interfaces on the router. Routers come with a variety of different interfaces, such as Fast Ethernet, Gigabit Ethernet, Serial, and Fiber-Optic.