# 27.2.1 Working in Sguil
The primary duty of a cybersecurity analyst is the verification of security alerts. Depending on the organization, the tools used to do this will vary. For example, a ticketing system may be used to manage task assignment and documentation. In Security Onion, the first place that a cybersecurity analyst will go to verify alerts is Sguil.

Sguil automatically correlates similar alerts into a single line and provides a way to view correlated events represented by that line. In order to get a sense of what has been happening in the network, it may be useful to sort on the **CNT** column to display the alerts with the highest frequency.

Right-clicking the **CNT** value and selecting **View Correlated Events** opens a tab that displays all events that are related by Sguil. This can help the cybersecurity analyst understand the time frame during which the correlated events were received by Sguil. Note that each event receives a unique event ID. Only the first event ID in the series of correlated events is displayed in the RealTime Events tab. 

# 27.2.2 Sguil Queries
Queries can be constructed in Sguil using the Query Builder. It simplifies constructing queries to a certain degree, but the cybersecurity analyst must know the field names and some issues with field values. For example, Sguil stores IP addresses in an integer representation. In order to query on an IP address in dotted decimal notation, the IP address value must be placed within the **INET_ATON()** function. Query Builder is opened from the Sguil **Query** menu. Select **Query Event Table** to search active events.

|Field Name|Type|Description|
|---|---|---|
|sid|int|the unique ID of the sensor|
|cid|int|the sensor’s unique event number|
|signature|varchar|the human-readable name of the event (e.g. “WEB-IIS view source via translate header”)|
|timestamp|datetime|the date and time the event occurred on the sensor|
|status|int|the Sguil classification assigned to this event. Unclassified events are priority 0.|
|src_ip|int|the source IP for the event. Use the INET_ATON() function to covert the address to the database’s integer representation.|
|dst_ip|int|the destination IP for the event|
|src_port|int|the source port of the packet that triggered the event|
|dst_port|int|the destination port of the packet that triggered the event|
|ip_proto|ing|IP protocol type of the packet. (6 = TCP, 17 = UDP, 1 = ICMP, others are possible)|
# 27.2.3 Pivoting from Sguil
Sguil provides the ability for the cybersecurity analyst to pivot to other information sources and tools. Log files are available in Elasticsearch. Relevant packet captures can be displayed in Wireshark. Transcripts of TCP sessions and Zeek (Bro) detection information are also available. 

Additionally, Sguil can provide pivots to Passive Real-time Asset Detection System (PRADS) and Security Analyst Network Connection Profiler (SANCP) information. These tools are accessed by right-clicking on an IP address for an event and selecting the Quick Query or Advanced Query menus.

PRADS gathers network profiling data, including information about the behavior of assets on the network. PRADS is an event source, like Snort and OSSEC. It can also be queried through Sguil when an alert indicates that an internal host may have been compromised. Executing a PRADS query out of Sguil can provide information about the services, applications, and payloads that may be relevant to the alert. In addition, PRADS detects when new assets appear on the network.

**Note:** The Sguil interface refers to PADS instead of PRADS. PADS was the predecessor to PRADS. PRADS is the tool that is actually used in Security Onion. PRADS is also used to populate SANCP tables. In Security Onion, the functionalities of SANCP have been replaced by PRADS, however the term SANCP is still used in the Sguil interface. PRADS collects the data, and a SANCP agent records the data in a SANCP data table.

The SANCP functionalities concern collecting and recording statistical information about network traffic and behavior. SANCP provides a means of verifying that network connections are valid. This is done through the application of rules that indicate which traffic should be recorded and the information with which the traffic should be tagged.

# 27.2.4 Event Handling in Sguil
Finally, Sguil is not only a console that facilitates investigation of alerts. It is also a tool for addressing or classifying alerts. Three tasks can be completed in Sguil to manage alerts. First, alerts that have been found to be false positives can be expired. This can be done by using the right-clicking in the ST column for the event an using the menu or by pressing the F8 key. An expired event disappears from the queue. Second, if the cybersecurity analyst is uncertain how to handle an event, it can be escalated by pressing the F9 key. The alert will be moved to the Sguil Escalated Events tab. Finally, an event can be categorized. Categorization is for events that have been identified as true positives.

Sguil includes seven pre-built categories that can be assigned by using a menu, which is shown in the figure, or by pressing the corresponding function key. For example, an event would be categorized as Cat I by pressing the F1 key. In addition, criteria can be created that will automatically categorize an event. Categorized events are assumed to have been handled by the cybersecurity analyst. When an event is categorized, it is removed from the list of **RealTime Events**. The event remains in the database however, and it can be accessed by queries that are issued by category.

# 27.2.5 Working in ELK
Logstash and Beats are used for data ingestion in the Elastic Stack. They provide access to large numbers of log file entries. Because the number of logs that can be displayed is so large, Kibana, which is the visual interface into the logs, is configured to show the last 24 hours by default. You can adjust the time range to view broader or older ranges of data.
he best way to monitor your data in Elasticsearch is to build customized visual dashboards that track the data that you are interested in using. A variety of visual charts including bar graphs, pie charts, count metrics, heat maps, Geo maps, top number lists are available. In Kibana, visualizations and charts can be searched and filtered with specific metrics and buckets of data.

# 27.2.6 Queries in ELK
Elasticsearch is built on Apache Lucene, an open-source search engine software library that features full text indexing and searching capabilities. Elasticsearch ingests data into documents called indices and those documents are mapped to various datatypes using index patterns. The index patterns create a data structure of JSON-formatted fields and values. The datatypes in the fields can be in the following formats:

- Core Datatypes: Text (Strings), Numeric, Date, Boolean, Binary, and Range
- Complex Datatypes: Object (JSON), Nested (arrays of JSON objects)
- Geo Datatypes: Geo-point (latitude/longitude), Geo-shape (polygons)
- Specialized Datatypes: IP addresses, Token count, Histogram, etc.)

Using Lucene software libraries, Elasticsearch has its own query language based on JSON called Query DSL (Domain Specific Language). Query DSL features leaf queries, compound queries, and expensive queries. Leaf queries look for a specific value in a specific field, such as the match, term, or range queries. Compound queries enclose other leaf or compound queries and are used to combine multiple queries in a logical fashion. Expensive queries execute slowly and include fuzzy matching, regex matching, and wildcard matching.

**Query Language**

Along with JSON, Elasticsearch queries make use of the following elements: Boolean operators, Fields, Ranges, Wildcards, Regex, Fuzzy search, Text search.

- **Boolean Operators** – AND, OR, and NOT operators:
    - “php” OR “zip” OR “exe” OR “jar” OR “run”
    - “RST” AND “ACK”
- **Fields** – In colon separated key:value pairs you specify the key field, a colon, a space and the value:
    - dst.ip: “192.168.1.5”
    - dst.port: 80
- **Ranges** – You can search for fields within a specific range using square brackets (inclusive) or curly braces (exclusive) range:
    - host:[1 TO 255] — Will return events with age between 1 and 255
    - TTL:{100 TO 400} — Will return events with prices between 101 and 399
    - name: [Admin TO User] — Will return names between and including Admin and User
- **Wildcards** – The * character is for multiple character wildcards and the ? character for single character wildcards:
    - P?ssw?rd — Will match Password, and P@ssw0rd
    - Pas* — Will match Pass, Passwd, and Password
- **Regex** – These are placed between forward slashes (/):
    - /d[ao]n/ — Will match both dan and don
    - /<.+>/ — Will match text that resembles an HTML tag
- **Fuzzy Search** – Fuzzy searching uses the Damerau-Levenshtein Distance to match terms that are similar in spelling. This is great when your data set has misspelled words. Use the tilde (~) to find similar terms:
    - index.php~ – This may return results like “index.html,” “home.php”, and “info.php.”
    - Use the tilde (~) along with a number to specify the how big the distance between words can be:
    - term~2 – This will match, among other things: “team,” “terms,” “trem,” and “torn”
- **Text search** – Type in the term or value you want to find. This can be a field, or a string within a field, etc.

**Query Execution**

Elasticsearch was designed to interface with users using web-based clients that follow the HTTP REST framework. Queries can be executed using the following methods:

- **URI** – Elasticsearch can execute queries using URI searches:
    - http://localhost:9200/_search?q=query:ns.example.com
- **cURL** – Elasticsearch can execute queries using cURL from the command line:
    - curl “localhost:9200/_search?q=query:ns.example.com”
- **JSON** – Elasticsearch can execute queries with a request body search using a JSON document beginning with a query element, and a query formatted using the Query Domain Specific Language.
- **Dev Tools** – Elasticsearch can execute queries using the Dev Tools console in Kibana and a query formatted using the Query Domain Specific Language.

# 27.2.7 Investigating Process or API Calls
Applications interact with an operating system (OS) through system calls to the OS application programming interface (API), as shown in the figure. These system calls allow access to many aspects of system operation such as:

- Software process control
- File management
- Device management
- Information management
- Communication

Malware can also make system calls. If malware can fool an OS kernel into allowing it to make system calls, many exploits are possible.

HIDS software tracks the operation of a host OS. OSSEC rules detect changes in host-based parameters like the execution of software processes, changes in user privileges, and registry modifications, among many others. OSSEC rules will trigger an alert in Sguil. Pivoting to Kibana on the host IP address allows you to choose the type of alert based on the program that created it. Filtering for OSSEC indices results in a view of the OSSEC events that occurred on the host, including indicators that malware may have interacted with the OS kernel.
# 27.2.8 Investigating File Details
In Sguil, if the cybersecurity analyst is suspicious of a file, the hash value can be submitted to an online site, such as VirusTotal, to determine if the file is known malware. The hash value can be submitted from the Search tab on the VirusTotal page.

In Kibana, Zeek Hunting can be used to display information regarding the files that have entered the network. From the MIME, or media, types that are present, filters can be set to display information about specific types of files such as **application/xml** or **application/zip**. From there, details for the individual files can be displayed, as shown in the figure. Note that in Kibana, the event type is shown as **bro_files**, even though the new name for Bro is Zeek.
