# 3.3.1 Run as Administrator
As a security best practice, it is not advisable to log on to Windows using the Administrator account or an account with administrative privileges. This is because any program that is executed while logged on with those privileges will inherit administrative privilege.
Sometimes, it is necessary to run or install software that requires the privileges of the Administrator.
# 3.3.2 Local Users and Domains
The local user account account will contain all of your customization settings, access permissions, file locations, and many other user-specific data. There are also two other accounts that are present, the guest, and the administrator. Both of these accounts are disabled by default.
To make administration of users easier, Windows uses groups. A group will have a name and a specific set of permissions associated with it. When a user is placed into a group, the permissions of that group are given to that user. A user can be placed into multiple groups to be provided with many different permissions. When the permissions overlap, certain permissions, like “explicitly deny” will override the permission provided by a different group.
Local users and groups are managed with the **lusrmgr.msc** control panel applet, as shown in the figure.

In addition to groups, Windows can also use domains to set permissions. A domain is a type of network service where all of the users, groups, computers, peripherals, and security settings are stored on and controlled by a database. This database is stored on special computers or groups of computers called domain controllers (DCs). Each user and computer on the domain must authenticate against the DC to logon and access network resources. The security settings for each user and each computer are set by the DC for each session. Any setting supplied by the DC defaults to the local computer or user account setting.
# 3.3.3 CLI and PowerShell
To open the Windows CLI, search for **cmd.exe** and click the program.
Even though the CLI has many commands and features, it cannot work together with the core of Windows or the GUI. Another environment, called the Windows PowerShell, can be used to create scripts to automate tasks that the regular CLI is unable to create. PowerShell also provides a CLI for initiating commands. PowerShell is an integrated program within Windows.
These are the types of commands that PowerShell can execute:

- **cmdlets** - These commands perform an action and return an output or object to the next command that will be executed.
- **PowerShell scripts** - These are files with a **.ps1** extension that contain PowerShell commands that are executed.
- **PowerShell functions** - These are pieces of code that can be referenced in a script.
There are four levels of help in Windows PowerShell:

- **get-help** _PS command_ - Displays basic help for a command
- **get-help** _PS command_ _-examples_ - Displays basic help for a command with examples
- **get-help** _PS command_ _-detailed_ - Displays detailed help for a command with examples
- **get-help** _PS command_ _-full_ - Displays all help information for a command with examples in greater depth
# 3.3.4 Windows Management Instrumentation
Windows Management Instrumentation (WMI) is used to manage remote computers. It can retrieve information about computer components, hardware and software statistics, and monitor the health of remote computers. To open the WMI control from the Control Panel, double-click **Administrative Tools > Computer Management** to open the Computer Management window, expand the **Services and Applications** tree and right-click the **WMI Control icon** **>** **Properties**.
# 3.3.5 The net Command
Windows has many commands that can be entered at the command line. One important command is the **net** command, which is used in the administration and maintenance of the OS. The **net** command supports many subcommands that follow the **net** command and can be combined with switches to focus on specific output.

To see a list of the many **net** commands, type **net help** at the command prompt.
The table lists some common **net** commands.

| Command          | Description                                                                          |
| ---------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| **net accounts** | Sets password and logon requirements for users.                                      |
| **net session**  | Lists or disconnects sessions between a computer and other computers on the network. |
| **net share**    | Create, removes, or manages shared resources.                                        |
| **net start**    | Starts a network service or lists running networks services.                         |
| **net stop**     | Stops a network service.                                                             |
| **net use**      | Connects, disconnects, and displays information about shared network resources.      |
| **net view**     | Shows a list of computers and network devices on the network.                        |
# 3.3.6 Task Manager and Resource Monitor
**Task Manager**
The Task Manager, provides a lot of information about the software that is running and the general performance of the computer.

**Resource Monitor**
When more detailed information about resource usage is needed, you can use the Resource Monitor.
# 3.3.7 Networking
**Network and Sharing Center**
The initial view shows an overview of the active network. This view shows whether there is internet access and if the network is private, public, or guest. The type of network, either wired or wireless, is also shown.

**Change Adapter Settings**
To configure a network adapter, choose **Change adapter settings** in the Networking and Sharing Center to show all of the network connections that are available. Select the adapter that you want to configure.
# 3.3.8 Accessing Network Resources
Originally developed by IBM, Microsoft aided in the development of the Server Message Block (SMB) protocol to share network resources. SMB is mostly used for accessing files on remote hosts. The Universal Naming Convention (UNC) format is used to connect to resources, for example:

**\servernamesharenamefile**
In the UNC, servername is the server that is hosting the resource. This can be a DNS name, a NetBIOS name, or simply an IP address. The sharename is the root of the folder in the file system on the remote host, while the file is the resource that the local host is trying to find. The file may be deeper within the file system and this hierarchy will need to be indicated

When sharing resources on the network, the area of the file system that will be shared will need to be identified. Access control can be applied to the folders and files to restrict users and groups to specific functions such as read, write, or deny. There are also special shares that are automatically created by Windows. These shares are called administrative shares. An administrative share is identified by the dollar sign ($) that comes after the share name. Each disk volume has an administrative share, represented by the volume letter and the $ such as C\$, D\$, or E\$. The Windows installation folder is shared as admin\$, the printers’ folder is shared as print$, and there are other administrative shares that can be connected. Only users with administrative privileges can access these shares.

Besides accessing shares on remote hosts, you can also log in to a remote host and manipulate that computer, as if it were local, to make configuration changes, install software, or troubleshoot an issue. In Windows, this feature uses the Remote Desktop Protocol (RDP).
# 3.3.9 Windows Server
These are some of the services that Windows Server provides:

- **Network Services** - DNS, DHCP, Terminal services, Network Controller, and Hyper-V Network virtualization
- **File Services** - SMB, NFS, and DFS
- **Web Services** - FTP, HTTP, and HTTPS
- **Management** - Group policy and Active Directory domain services control
