# 12.5.1 Components of Troubleshooting End-to-End Connectivity
When there is no end-to-end connectivity, and the administrator chooses to troubleshoot with a bottom-up approach, the following are common steps the administrator can take:

**Step 1.** Check physical connectivity at the point where network communication stops. This includes cables and hardware. The problem might be with a faulty cable or interface, or involve misconfigured or faulty hardware.  
**Step 2.** Check for duplex mismatches.  
**Step 3.** Check data link and network layer addressing on the local network. This includes IPv4 ARP tables, IPv6 neighbor tables, MAC address tables, and VLAN assignments.  
**Step 4.** Verify that the default gateway is correct.  
**Step 5.** Ensure that devices are determining the correct path from the source to the destination. Manipulate the routing information if necessary.  
**Step 6.** Verify the transport layer is functioning properly. Telnet can also be used to test transport layer connections from the command line.  
**Step 7.** Verify that there are no ACLs blocking traffic.  
**Step 8.** Ensure that DNS settings are correct. There should be a DNS server that is accessible.

The outcome of this process is operational, end-to-end connectivity. If all the steps have been performed without any resolution, the network administrator may either want to repeat the previous steps or escalate the problem to a senior administrator.

# 12.5.2 End-to-End Connectivity Problem Initiates Troubleshooting
Usually what initiates a troubleshooting effort is the discovery that there is a problem with end-to-end connectivity. Two of the most common utilities used to verify a problem with end-to-end connectivity are **ping** and **traceroute**.

**IPv4 ping**
Ping is probably the most widely-known connectivity-testing utility in networking and has always been part of Cisco IOS Software. It sends out requests for responses from a specified host address. The **ping** command uses a Layer 3 protocol that is a part of the TCP/IP suite called ICMP. Ping uses the ICMP echo request and ICMP echo reply packets. If the host at the specified address receives the ICMP echo request, it responds with an ICMP echo reply packet. Ping can be used to verify end-to-end connectivity for both IPv4 and IPv6. The command output shows a successful ping from PC1 to SRV1, at address 172.16.1.100.
```
C:\> ping 172.16.1.100
Pinging 172.16.1.100 with 32 bytes of data:
Reply from 172.16.1.100: bytes=32 time=199ms TTL=128
Reply from 172.16.1.100: bytes=32 time=193ms TTL=128
Reply from 172.16.1.100: bytes=32 time=194ms TTL=128
Reply from 172.16.1.100: bytes=32 time=196ms TTL=128
Ping statistics for 172.16.1.100:
    Packets: Sent = 4, Received = 4, Lost = 0 (0% loss),
Approximate round trip times in milli-seconds:
    Minimum = 193ms, Maximum = 199ms, Average = 195ms
C:\>
```

**IPv4 traceroute**
Like the **ping** command, the Cisco IOS **traceroute** command can be used for both IPv4 and IPv6. The **tracert** command is used with Windows operating systems. The trace generates a list of hops, router IP addresses and the destination IP address that are successfully reached along the path. This list provides important verification and troubleshooting information. If the data reaches the destination, the trace lists the interface on every router in the path. If the data fails at some hop along the way, the address of the last router that responded to the trace is known. This address is an indication of where the problem or security restrictions reside.
```
C:\> tracert 172.16.1.100
Tracing route to 172.16.1.100 over a maximum of 30 hops:
  1     1 ms    <1 ms    <1 ms  10.1.10.1
  2     2 ms     2 ms     1 ms  192.168.1.2
  3     2 ms     2 ms     1 ms  192.168.1.6
  4     2 ms     2 ms     1 ms  172.16.1.100
Trace complete.
C:\>
```

**IPv6 ping and traceroute**
When using these utilities, the Cisco IOS utility recognizes whether the address is an IPv4 or IPv6 address and uses the appropriate protocol to test connectivity. The command output shows the **ping** and **traceroute** commands on router R1 used to test IPv6 connectivity.
```
R1# ping 2001:db8:acad:4::100 
Type escape sequence to abort.
Sending 5, 100-byte ICMP Echos to 2001:DB8:ACAD:4::100, timeout is 2 seconds:
!!!!!
Success rate is 100 percent (5/5), round-trip min/avg/max = 56/56/56 ms
R1#
R1# traceroute 2001:db8:acad:4::100 
Type escape sequence to abort.
Tracing the route to 2001:DB8:ACAD:4::100
1.   2001:DB8:ACAD:2::2 20 msec 20 msec 20 msec
2.   2001:DB8:ACAD:3::2 44 msec 40 msec 40 msec 
R1#
```
# 12.5.3 Step 1 – Verify the Physical Layer
All network devices are specialized computer systems. At a minimum, these devices consist of a CPU, RAM, and storage space, allowing the device to boot and run the operating system and interfaces. This allows for the reception and transmission of network traffic. When a network administrator determines that a problem exists on a given device, and that problem might be hardware-related, it is worthwhile to verify the operation of these generic components. The most commonly used Cisco IOS commands for this purpose are **show processes cpu**, **show memory**, and **show interfaces**. This topic discusses the **show interfaces** command.

When troubleshooting performance-related issues and hardware is suspected to be at fault, the **show interfaces** command can be used to verify the interfaces through which the traffic passes.
```
R1# show interfaces GigabitEthernet 0/0/0
GigabitEthernet0/0/0 is up, line protocol is up 
Hardware is CN Gigabit Ethernet, address is d48c.b5ce.a0c0(bia d48c.b5ce.a0c0) 
Internet address is 10.1.10.1/24 
(Output omitted)
Input queue: 0/75/0/0 (size/max/drops/flushes); Total output drops: 0
Queueing strategy: fifo 
 Output queue: 0/40 (size/max) 
5 minute input rate 0 bits/sec, 0 packets/sec 
5 minute output rate 0 bits/sec, 0 packets/sec 
85 packets input, 7711 bytes, 0 no buffer 
Received 25 broadcasts (0 IP multicasts)
0 runts, 0 giants, 0 throttles
0 input errors, 0 CRC, 0 frame, 0 overrun, 0 ignored 
0 watchdog, 5 multicast, 0 pause input 
10112 packets output, 922864 bytes, 0 underruns 
0 output errors, 0 collisions, l interface resets 
11 unknown protocol drops 
0 babbles, 0 late collision, 0 deferred 
0 lost carrier, 0 no carrier, 0 pause output 
0 output buffer failures, 0 output buffers swapped out 
R1#
```

**Input queue drops**
Input queue drops (and the related ignored and throttle counters) signify that at some point, more traffic was delivered to the router than it could process. This does not necessarily indicate a problem. That could be normal traffic during peak periods. However, it could be an indication that the CPU cannot process packets in time, so if this number is consistently high, it is worth trying to spot at which moments these counters are increasing and how this relates to CPU usage.

**Output queue drops**
Output queue drops indicate that packets were dropped due to congestion on the interface. Seeing output drops is normal for any point where the aggregate input traffic is higher than the output traffic. During peak traffic periods, packets are dropped if traffic is delivered to the interface faster than it can be sent out. However, even if this is considered normal behavior, it leads to packet drops and queuing delays, so applications that are sensitive to those, such as VoIP, might suffer from performance issues. Consistently seeing output queue drops can be an indicator that you need to implement an advanced queuing mechanism to implement or modify QoS.

**Input errors**
Input errors indicate errors that are experienced during the reception of the frame, such as CRC errors. High numbers of CRC errors could indicate cabling problems, interface hardware problems, or, in an Ethernet-based network, duplex mismatches.

**Output errors**
Output errors indicate errors, such as collisions, during the transmission of a frame. In most Ethernet-based networks today, full-duplex transmission is the norm, and half-duplex transmission is the exception. In full-duplex transmission, operation collisions cannot occur; therefore, collisions (especially late collisions) often indicate duplex mismatches.

# 12.5.4 Step 2 – Check for Duplex Mismatches
Another common cause for interface errors is a mismatched duplex mode between two ends of an Ethernet link. In many Ethernet-based networks, point-to-point connections are now the norm, and the use of hubs and the associated half-duplex operation is becoming less common. This means that most Ethernet links today operate in full-duplex mode, and while collisions were normal for an Ethernet link, collisions today often indicate that duplex negotiation has failed, or the link is not operating in the correct duplex mode.

The IEEE 802.3ab Gigabit Ethernet standard mandates the use of autonegotiation for speed and duplex. In addition, although it is not strictly mandatory, practically all Fast Ethernet NICs also use autonegotiation by default. The use of autonegotiation for speed and duplex is the current recommended practice.

However, if duplex negotiation fails for some reason, it might be necessary to set the speed and duplex manually on both ends. Typically, this would mean setting the duplex mode to full-duplex on both ends of the connection. If this does not work, running half-duplex on both ends is preferred over a duplex mismatch.

Duplex configuration guidelines include the following:

- Autonegotiation of speed and duplex is recommended.
- If autonegotiation fails, manually set the speed and duplex on interconnecting ends.
- Point-to-point Ethernet links should always run in full-duplex mode.
- Half-duplex is uncommon and typically encountered only when legacy hubs are used.
```
S1# show interface fa 0/20
FastEthernet0/20 is up, line protocol is up (connected) 
Hardware is Fast Ethernet, address is 0cd9.96e8.8a01 (bia 0cd9.96e8.8a01)
MTU 1500 bytes, BW 10000 Kbit/sec, DLY 1000 usec, reliability 255/255, txload 1/255, rxload 1/255 
Encapsulation ARPA, loopback not set Keepalive set (10 sec)
Full-duplex, Auto-speed, media type is 10/100BaseTX 
  
(Output omitted)
  
S1#
```
The network administrator now examines the other side of the connection, the port on S2. The command out shows that this side of the connection has been configured for half-duplex.
```
S2# show interface fa 0/20
FastEthernet0/20 is up, line protocol is up (connected) 
Hardware is Fast Ethernet, address is 0cd9.96d2.4001 (bia 0cd9.96d2.4001)
MTU 1500 bytes, BW 100000 Kbit/sec, DLY 100 usec, reliability 255/255, txload 1/255, rxload 1/255 
Encapsulation ARPA, loopback not set Keepalive set (10 sec)
Half-duplex, Auto-speed, media type is 10/100BaseTX 
  
(Output omitted)
  
S2(config)# interface fa 0/20 
S2(config-if)# duplex auto 
S2(config-if)#
```

# 12.5.5 Step 3 – Verify Addressing on the Local Network
**Windows IPv4 ARP Table**
``` 
C:\> arp -a
Interface: 10.1.10.100 --- 0xd
  Internet Address      Physical Address      Type
  10.1.10.1             d4-8c-b5-ce-a0-c0    dynamic
  224.0.0.22            01-00-5e-00-00-16     static
  224.0.0.251           01-00-5e-00-00-fb     static
  239.255.255.250       01-00-5e-7f-ff-fa     static
  255.255.255.255       ff-ff-ff-ff-ff-ff     static
C:\>
```

**Windows IPv6 Neighbor Table**
```
C:\> netsh interface ipv6 show neighbor 
Internet Address                              Physical Address   Type
--------------------------------------------  -----------------  -----------
fe80::9657:a5ff:fe0c:5b02                     94-57-a5-0c-5b-02  Stale
fe80::1                                       d4-8c-b5-ce-a0-c0  Reachable (Router)
ff02::1                                       33-33-00-00-00-01  Permanent
ff02::2                                       33-33-00-00-00-02  Permanent
ff02::16                                      33-33-00-00-00-16  Permanent
ff02::1:2                                     33-33-00-01-00-02  Permanent
ff02::1:3                                     33-33-00-01-00-03  Permanent
ff02::1:ff0c:5b02                             33-33-ff-0c-5b-02  Permanent
ff02::1:ff2d:a75e                             33-33-ff-2d-a7-5e  Permanent
```

**IOS IPv6 Neighbor Table**
```
R1# show ipv6 neighbors 
IPv6 Address                        Age  Link-layer Addr   State  Interface
FE80::21E:7AFF:FE79:7A81              8  001e.7a79.7a81    STALE  Gi0/0
2001:DB8:ACAD:1:5075:D0FF:FE8E:9AD8   0  5475.d08e.9ad8    REACH  Gi0/0
```
**Switch MAC Address Table**
```
S1# show mac address-table
              Mac Address Table
--------------------------------------------
Vlan      Mac Address         Type     Ports
All       0100.0ccc.cccc      STATIC   CPU
All       0100.0ccc.cccd      STATIC   CPU
10        d48c.b5ce.a0c0      DYNAMIC  Fa0/4
10        000f.34f9.9201      DYNAMIC  Fa0/5
10        5475.d08e.9ad8      DYNAMIC  Fa0/13
Total Mac Addresses for this criterion: 5
```

# 12.5.6 Troubleshoot VLAN Assignment Example
Another issue to consider when troubleshooting end-to-end connectivity is VLAN assignment. In the switched network, each port in a switch belongs to a VLAN. Each VLAN is considered a separate logical network, and packets destined for stations that do not belong to the VLAN must be forwarded through a device that supports routing. If a host in one VLAN sends a broadcast Ethernet frame, such as an ARP request, all hosts in the same VLAN receive the frame; hosts in other VLANs do not. Even if two hosts are in the same IP network, they will not be able to communicate if they are connected to ports assigned to two separate VLANs. Additionally, if the VLAN to which the port belongs is deleted, the port becomes inactive. All hosts attached to ports belonging to the VLAN that was deleted are unable to communicate with the rest of the network. Commands such as show vlan can be used to validate VLAN assignments on a switch.

**Check the ARP Table**
**Check the Switch MAC Table**
**Correct the VLAN Assignment**

# 12.5.7 Step 4 – Verify Default Gateway
If there is no detailed route on the router, or if the host is configured with the wrong default gateway, then communication between two endpoints in different networks does not work.
**R1 Routing Table**
``` 
R1# show ip route | include Gateway|0.0.0.0
  
Gateway of last resort is 192.168.1.2 to network 0.0.0.0 
S* 0.0.0.0/0 [1/0] via 192.168.1.2
  
R1#
```

**PC1 Routing Table**
```
C:\> route print
(Output omitted)
  
IPv4 Route Table
===========================================================================
Active Routes:
Network Destination        Netmask          Gateway       Interface  Metric
          0.0.0.0          0.0.0.0        10.1.10.1      10.1.10.10      11
(Output omitted)
```

# 12.5.10 Step 6 – Verify the Transport Layer
If the network layer appears to be functioning as expected, but users are still unable to access resources, then the network administrator must begin troubleshooting the upper layers. Two of the most common issues that affect transport layer connectivity include ACL configurations and NAT configurations. A common tool for testing transport layer functionality is the Telnet utility.
**Caution:** While Telnet can be used to test the transport layer, for security reasons, SSH should be used to remotely manage and configure devices.

# 12.5.11 Step 7 – Verify ACLs
On routers, there may be ACLs that prohibit protocols from passing through the interface in the inbound or outbound direction.

Use the **show ip access-lists** command to display the contents of all IPv4 ACLs and the **show ipv6 access-list** command to display the contents of all IPv6 ACLs configured on a router. The specific ACL can be displayed by entering the ACL name or number as an option for this command. The **show ip interfaces** and **show ipv6 interfaces** commands display IPv4 and IPv6 interface information that indicates whether any IP ACLs are set on the interface.

**show ip access-lists**
```
R3# show ip access-lists
Extended IP access list 100
    10 deny ip 172.16.1.0 0.0.0.255 any (108 matches)
    20 permit ip any any (28 matches)
R3#
```

**show ip interfaces**
```
R3# show ip interface serial 0/1/1 | include access list
  Outgoing Common access list is not set
  Outgoing access list is not set
  Inbound Common access list is not set
  Inbound  access list is not set
R3#
R3# show ip interface gig 0/0/0 | include access list
  Outgoing Common access list is not set
  Outgoing access list is not set
  Inbound Common access list is not set
  Inbound  access list is 100
R3#
```

**Correct the Issue**
```
R3(config)# interface GigabitEthernet 0/0/0
R3(config-if)# no ip access-group 100 in
R3(config-if)# exit
R3(config)#
R3(config)# interface serial 0/1/1
R3(config-if)# ip access-group 100 in
R3(config-if)# end
R3#
```

# 12.5.12 Step 8 – Verify DNS
The DNS protocol controls the DNS, a distributed database with which you can map hostnames to IP addresses. When you configure DNS on the device, you can substitute the hostname for the IP address with all IP commands, such as **ping** or **telnet**.

To display the DNS configuration information on the switch or router, use the **show running-config** command. When there is no DNS server installed, it is possible to enter names to IP mappings directly into the switch or router configuration. Use the **ip host** command to enter a name to be used instead of the IPv4 address of the switch or router, as shown in the command output.