# 4.1.1 What is Linux?
Linux is an operating system that was created in 1991. Linux is open source, fast, reliable, and small. It requires very little hardware resources to run and is highly customizable. Unlike other operating systems such as Windows and Mac OS X, Linux was created, and is currently maintained by, a community of programmers. Linux is part of several platforms and can be found on devices anywhere from “wristwatches to supercomputers”.
# 4.1.2 The Value of Linux
Linux is often the operating system of choice in the Security Operations Center (SOC). These are some of the reasons to choose Linux:

- **Linux is open source** - Any person can acquire Linux at no charge and modify it to fit specific needs. This flexibility allows analysts and administrators to tailor-build an operating system specifically for security analysis.
- **The Linux CLI is very powerful** - While a GUI makes many tasks easier to perform, it adds complexity and requires more computer resources to run. The Linux Command Line Interface (CLI) is extremely powerful and enables analysts to perform tasks not only directly on a terminal, but also remotely.
- **The user has more control over the OS** - The administrator user in Linux, known as the root user, or superuser, has absolute power over the computer. Unlike other operating systems, the root user can modify any aspect of the computer with a few keystrokes. This ability is especially valuable when working with low level functions such as the network stack. It allows the root user to have precise control over the way network packets are handled by the operating system.
- **It allows for better network communication control** - Control is an inherent part of Linux. Because the OS can be adjusted in practically every aspect, it is a great platform for creating network applications. This is the same reason that many great network-based software tools are available for Linux only.
# 4.1.3 Linux in the SOC
The flexibility provided by Linux is a great feature for the SOC. The entire operating system can be tailored to become the perfect security analysis platform. For example, administrators can add only the necessary packages to the OS, making it lean and efficient. Specific software tools can be installed and configured to work in conjunction, allowing administrators to build a customized computer that fits perfectly in the workflow of a SOC.
# 4.1.4 Linux Tools
In addition to SOC-specific tools, Linux computers that are used in the SOC often contain penetration testing tools. Also known as PenTesting, a penetration test is the process of looking for vulnerabilities in a network or computer by attacking it. Packet generators, port scanners, and proof-of-concept exploits are examples of PenTesting tools.