# 4.7.1 Installing and Running Applications on a Linux Host
Many end-user applications are complex programs written in compiled languages. To aid in the installation process, Linux often includes programs called package managers. A package is the term used to refer to a program and all its supporting files. By using a package manager to install a package, all the necessary files are placed in the correct file system location.

Package managers vary depending on Linux distributions. For example, **pacman** is used by Arch Linux while **dpkg** (Debian package) and **apt** (Advanced Packaging Tool) are used in Debian and Ubuntu Linux distributions. For this course, we will use the **pacman** package manager.
# 4.7.2 Keeping the System Up to Date

| Task                                    | Arch            | Debian/Ubuntu       |
| --------------------------------------- | --------------- | ------------------- |
| Install a package by name               | **pacman -S**   | **apt install**     |
| Remove a package by name                | **pacman -Rs**  | **apt remove**      |
| Update a local package                  | **pacman -Syy** | **apt-get  update** |
| Update all currently installed packages | **pacman -Syu** | **apt-get upgrade** |
# 4.7.3 Processes and Forks
Forking is a method that the kernel uses to allow a process to create a copy of itself. Processes need a way to create new processes in multitasking operating systems. The fork operation is the only way of doing so in Linux.
When a process calls a fork, the caller process becomes the parent process, with the newly created process referred to as its child. After the fork, the processes are, to some extent, independent processes; they have different process IDs but run the same program code.

| **Command** | **Description**                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
| ----------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| **ps**      | - Used to list the processes running on the computer at the time it is invoked.<br>- It can be instructed to display running processes that belong to the current user or other users.<br>- While listing processes does not require root privileges, killing or modifying other user’s processes does.  |
| **top**     | - Used to list running processes, but unlike **ps**, **top** keeps displaying running processes dynamically.<br>- Press **q** to exit top.                                                                                                                                                               |
| **kill**    | - Used to modify the behavior of a specific process.<br>- Depending on the parameters, **kill** will remove, restart, or pause a process.<br>- In many cases, the user will run **ps** or **top** before running kill.<br>- This is done so the user can learn the PID of a process before running kill. |
# 4.7.4 Malware on a Linux Host
Linux malware includes viruses, Trojan horses, worms, and other types of malware that can affect the operating system. Due to a number of design components such as file system structure, file permissions, and user account restrictions, Linux operating systems are generally regarded as better protected against malware.
A common Linux attack vector is its services and processes. Vulnerabilities are frequently found in server and process code running on computers connected to the network.
# 4.7.5 Rootkit Check
A rootkit is a type of malware that is designed to increase an unauthorized user’s privileges or grant access to portions of the software that should not normally be allowed. Rootkits are also often used to secure a backdoor to a compromised computer.

Rootkit removal can be complicated and often impossible, especially in cases where the rootkit resides in the kernel; re-installation of the operating system is usually the only real solution to the problem. Firmware rootkits usually require hardware replacement.

**chkrootkit** is a popular Linux-based program designed to check the computer for known rootkits. It is a shell script that uses common Linux tools such as **strings** and **grep** to compare the signatures of core programs. It also looks for discrepancies as it traverses the /proc file system comparing the signatures found there with the output of **ps**.

While helpful, keep in mind that programs to check for rootkits are not 100% reliable.

# 4.7.6 Piping Commands
Named after its defining character, the pipe (**|**), piping consists of chaining commands together, feeding the output of one command into the input of another.