# 5.1.1 Networks of Many Sizes
**Small Home Networks**
Small home networks connect a few computers to each other and to the internet.

**Small Office and Home Office Networks**
The SOHO network allows computers in a home office or a remote office to connect to a corporate network, or access centralized, shared resources.

**Medium to Large Networks**
Medium to large networks, such as those used by corporations and schools, can have many locations with hundreds or thousands of interconnected hosts.

**World Wide Networks**
The internet is a network of networks that connects hundreds of millions of computers world-wide.
# 5.1.2 Client-Server Communications
Servers are simply computers with specialized software. This software enables servers to provide information to other end devices on the network. A server can be single-purpose, providing only one service, such as web pages. A server can be multipurpose, providing a variety of services such as web pages, email, and file transfers.

Client computers have software installed, such as web browsers, email clients, and file transfers applications. This software enables them to request and display the information obtained from the server. A single computer can also run multiple types of client software. For example, a user can check email and view a web page while listening to internet radio.

- **File Server** - The file server stores corporate and user files in a central location.
- **Web Server** - The web server runs web server software that allows many computers to access web pages.
- **Email Server** - The email server runs email server software that enables emails to be sent and received.
# 5.1.4 Tracing the Path
A combination of copper and fiber-optic cables that go over land and under the ocean carry data traffic. High-speed wireless and satellite technologies are also used. These connections connect telecommunications facilities and internet service providers (ISP) that are distributed throughout the world. These global Tier 1 and Tier 2 ISPs connect portions of the internet together, usually through an Internet Exchange Point (IXP). Larger networks will connect to Tier 2 networks through a Point of Presence (PoP), which is usually a location in the building where physical connections to the ISP are made. The Tier 3 ISPs connect homes and businesses to the internet.
Cybersecurity analysts must be able to determine the origin of traffic that enters the network, and the destination of traffic that leaves it. Understanding the path that network traffic takes is essential to this.