# 5.2.1 What are Protocols?
Communication, whether by face-to-face or over a network, is governed by rules called protocols. These protocols are specific to the type of communication method occurring.

# 5.2.2 Network Protocols
Network protocols provide the means for computers to communicate on networks. Network protocols dictate the message encoding, formatting, encapsulation, size, timing, and delivery options. Networking protocols define a common format and set of rules for exchanging messages between devices.
- Message Structure
- Path Sharing
- Information Sharing
- Session Management
# 5.2.3 The TCP/IP Protocol Suite
CP/IP is the protocol suite used by the internet and the networks of today. TCP/IP has two important aspects for vendors and manufacturers:

- **Open standard protocol suite** - This means it is freely available to the public and can be used by any vendor on their hardware or in their software.
- **Standards-based protocol suite** - This means it has been endorsed by the networking industry and approved by a standards organization. This ensures that products from different manufacturers can interoperate successfully.
**Application Layer**

Name System

- **DNS** - Domain Name System. Translates domain names such as cisco.com, into IP addresses.

Host Config

- **DHCPv4** - Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol for IPv4. A DHCPv4 server dynamically assigns IPv4 addressing information to DHCPv4 clients at start-up and allows the addresses to be re-used when no longer needed.
- **DHCPv6** - Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol for IPv6. DHCPv6 is similar to DHCPv4. A DHCPv6 server dynamically assigns IPv6 addressing information to DHCPv6 clients at start-up.
- **SLAAC** - Stateless Address Autoconfiguration. A method that allows a device to obtain its IPv6 addressing information without using a DHCPv6 server.

Email

- **SMTP** - Simple Mail Transfer Protocol. Enables clients to send email to a mail server and enables servers to send email to other servers.
- **POP3** - Post Office Protocol version 3. Enables clients to retrieve email from a mail server and download the email to the client's local mail application.
- **IMAP** - Internet Message Access Protocol. Enables clients to access email stored on a mail server as well as maintaining email on the server.

File Transfer

- **FTP** - File Transfer Protocol. Sets the rules that enable a user on one host to access and transfer files to and from another host over a network. FTP is a reliable, connection-oriented, and acknowledged file delivery protocol.
- **SFTP** - SSH File Transfer Protocol. As an extension to Secure Shell (SSH) protocol, SFTP can be used to establish a secure file transfer session in which the file transfer is encrypted. SSH is a method for secure remote login that is typically used for accessing the command line of a device.
- **TFTP** - Trivial File Transfer Protocol. A simple, connectionless file transfer protocol with best-effort, unacknowledged file delivery. It uses less overhead than FTP.

Web and Web Service

- **HTTP** - Hypertext Transfer Protocol. A set of rules for exchanging text, graphic images, sound, video, and other multimedia files on the World Wide Web.
- **HTTPS** - HTTP Secure. A secure form of HTTP that encrypts the data that is exchanged over the World Wide Web.
- **REST** - Representational State Transfer. A web service that uses application programming interfaces (APIs) and HTTP requests to create web applications.
**Transport layer**

Connection-Oriented

- **TCP** - Transmission Control Protocol. Enables reliable communication between processes running on separate hosts and provides reliable, acknowledged transmissions that confirm successful delivery.

Connectionless

- **UDP** - User Datagram Protocol. Enables a process running on one host to send packets to a process running on another host. However, UDP does not confirm successful datagram transmission.
**Internet Layer**

Internet Protocol

- **IPv4** - Internet Protocol version 4. Receives message segments from the transport layer, packages messages into packets, and addresses packets for end-to-end delivery over a network. IPv4 uses a 32-bit address.
- **IPv6** - IP version 6. Similar to IPv4 but uses a 128-bit address.
- **NAT** - Network Address Translation. Translates IPv4 addresses from a private network into globally unique public IPv4 addresses.

Messaging

- **ICMPv4** - Internet Control Message Protocol for IPv4. Provides feedback from a destination host to a source host about errors in packet delivery.
- **ICMPv6** - ICMP for IPv6. Similar functionality to ICMPv4 but is used for IPv6 packets.
- **ICMPv6 ND** - ICMPv6 Neighbor Discovery. Includes four protocol messages that are used for address resolution and duplicate address detection.

Routing Protocols

- **OSPF** - Open Shortest Path First. Link-state routing protocol that uses a hierarchical design based on areas. OSPF is an open standard interior routing protocol.
- **EIGRP** - EIGRP - Enhanced Interior Gateway Routing Protocol. An open standard routing protocol developed by Cisco that uses a composite metric based on bandwidth, delay, load and reliability.
- **BGP** - Border Gateway Protocol. An open standard exterior gateway routing protocol used between Internet Service Providers (ISPs). BGP is also commonly used between ISPs and their large private clients to exchange routing information.
**Network Access Layer**

Address Resolution

- **ARP** - Address Resolution Protocol. Provides dynamic address mapping between an IPv4 address and a hardware address.
    
    **Note:** You may see other documentation state that ARP operates at the Internet Layer (OSI Layer 3). However, in this course we state that ARP operates at the Network Access layer (OSI Layer 2) because it's primary purpose is the discover the MAC address of the destination. A MAC address is a Layer 2 address.
    

Data Link Protocols

- **Ethernet** - Defines the rules for wiring and signaling standards of the network access layer.
- **WLAN** - Wireless Local Area Network. Defines the rules for wireless signaling across the 2.4 GHz and 5 GHz radio frequencies.
# 5.2.4 Message Formatting and Encapsulation
When a message is sent from source to destination, it must use a specific format or structure. Message formats depend on the type of message and the channel that is used to deliver the message.
# 5.2.5 Message Size
The size restrictions of frames require the source host to break a long message into individual pieces that meet both the minimum and maximum size requirements. The long message will be sent in separate frames, with each frame containing a piece of the original message. Each frame will also have its own addressing information. At the receiving host, the individual pieces of the message are reconstructed into the original message.
# 5.2.6 Message Timing
Message timing is also very important in network communications. Message timing includes the following:

- **Flow Control** - This is the process of managing the rate of data transmission. Flow control defines how much information can be sent and the speed at which it can be delivered. For example, if one person speaks too quickly, it may be difficult for the receiver to hear and understand the message. In network communication, there are network protocols used by the source and destination devices to negotiate and manage the flow of information.
- **Response Timeout** - If a person asks a question and does not hear a response within an acceptable amount of time, the person assumes that no answer is coming and reacts accordingly. The person may repeat the question or instead, may go on with the conversation. Hosts on the network use network protocols that specify how long to wait for responses and what action to take if a response timeout occurs.
- **Access method** - This determines when someone can send a message. Click Play in the figure to see an animation of two people talking at the same time, then a "collision of information" occurs, and it is necessary for the two to back off and start again. Likewise, when a device wants to transmit on a wireless LAN, it is necessary for the WLAN network interface card (NIC) to determine whether the wireless medium is available.

# 5.2.7 Unicast, Multicast, and Broadcast
**Unicast**
A one-to-one delivery option is referred to as a unicast, meaning there is only a single destination for the message.
**Multicast**
When a host needs to send messages using a one-to-many delivery option, it is referred to as a multicast.
**Broadcast**
If all hosts on the network need to receive the message at the same time, a broadcast may be used. Broadcasting represents a one-to-all message delivery option.
# 5.2.8 The Benefits of Using a Layered Model
These are the benefits of using a layered model to describe network protocols and operations:

- Assisting in protocol design because protocols that operate at a specific layer have defined information that they act upon and a defined interface to the layers above and below
- Fostering competition because products from different vendors can work together
- Preventing technology or capability changes in one layer from affecting other layers above and below
- Providing a common language to describe networking functions and capabilities
# 5.2.9 The OSI Reference Model
The OSI reference model provides an extensive list of functions and services that can occur at each layer. This type of model provides consistency within all types of network protocols and services by describing what must be done at a particular layer, but not prescribing how it should be accomplished.

|**OSI Model Layer**|**Description**|
|---|---|
|**7 - Application**|The application layer contains protocols used for process-to-process communications.|
|**6 - Presentation**|The presentation layer provides for common representation of the data transferred between application layer services.|
|**5 - Session**|The session layer provides services to the presentation layer to organize its dialogue and to manage data exchange.|
|**4 - Transport**|The transport layer defines services to segment, transfer, and reassemble the data for individual communications between the end devices.|
|**3 - Network**|The network layer provides services to exchange the individual pieces of data over the network between identified end devices.|
|**2 - Data Link**|The data link layer protocols describe methods for exchanging data frames between devices over a common media.|
|**1 - Physical**|The physical layer protocols describe the mechanical, electrical, functional, and procedural means to activate, maintain, and de-activate physical connections for a bit transmission to and from a network device.|
# 5.2.10 The TCP/IP Protocol Model
The TCP/IP protocol model for internetwork communications was created in the early 1970s and is sometimes referred to as the internet model. This type of model closely matches the structure of a particular protocol suite. The TCP/IP model is a protocol model because it describes the functions that occur at each layer of protocols within the TCP/IP suite. TCP/IP is also used as a reference model. The table shows details about each layer of the OSI model.

| **TCP/IP Model Layer** | **Description**                                                         |
| ---------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| **4 - Application**    | Represents data to the user, plus encoding and dialog control.          |
| **3 - Transport**      | Supports communication between various devices across diverse networks. |
| **2 - Internet**       | Determines the best path through the network.                           |
| **1 - Network Access** | Controls the hardware devices and media that make up the network        |
The definitions of the standard and the TCP/IP protocols are discussed in a public forum and defined in a publicly available set of IETF request for comment (RFC) documents. An RFC is authored by networking engineers and sent to other IETF members for comments.

