# 13.3.2 SNMP and RADIUS
For WLAN user authentication, the network administrator wants to use a RADIUS server for authentication, authorization, and accounting (AAA) services. Instead of entering a publicly known pre-shared key to authenticate, as they do with WPA2-PSK, users will enter their own username and password credentials. The credentials will be verified by the RADIUS server. This way, individual user access can be tracked and audited if necessary and user accounts can be added or modified from a central location. The RADIUS server is required for WLANs that are using WPA2 Enterprise authentication.

# 13.3.3 Configure SNMP Server Information
Click the **MANAGEMENT** tab to access a variety of management features. SNMP is listed at the top of the menu on the left. Click **SNMP** to expand the sub-menus, and then click **Trap Receivers**. Click **New...** to configure a new SNMP trap receiver,
1. Click **MANAGEMENT**
2. Click **SNMP**
3. Click **Trap Receivers**
4. Click **New...**
Enter the SNMP Community name and the IP address (IPv4 or IPv6) for the SNMP server. Click **Apply**. The WLC will now forward SNMP log messages to the SNMP server.

# 13.3.4 Configure RADIUS Server Information
To configure the WLC with the RADIUS server information, click the **SECURITY** tab > **RADIUS** > **Authentication**. No RADIUS servers are currently configured. Click **New...** to add PC-A as the RADIUS server.
- Click **SECURITY**
- Click **RADIUS**
- Click **Authentication**
- Click **New...**
# 13.3.7 Configure a New Interface
VLAN interface configuration on the WLC includes the following steps:

1. Create a new interface.
2. Configure the VLAN name and ID.
3. Configure the port and interface address.
4. Configure the DHCP server address.
5. Apply and Confirm.
6. Verify Interfaces.

# 13.3.9 Configure a DHCP Scope
DHCP scope configuration includes the following steps:

1. Create a new DHCP scope.
2. Name the DHCP scope.
3. Verify the new DHCP scope.
4. Configure and enable the new DHCP scope.
5. Verify the enable DHCP scope
# 13.3.11 Configure a WPA2 Enterprise WLAN
Configuring a new WLAN on the WLC includes the following steps:

1. Create a new WLAN.
2. Configure the WLAN name and SSID.
3. Enable the WLAN for VLAN 5.
4. Verify AES and 802.1X defaults.
5. Configure WLAN security to use the RADIUS server.
6. Verify the new WLAN is available.