# 13.4.1 Troubleshooting Approaches
1. Identify the Problem
2. Establish a Theory of Probable Causes
3. Test the Theory to Determine Cause
4. Establish a Plan of Action to Resolve the Problem and Implement the Solution
5. Verify Full System Functionality and Implement Preventive Measures
6. Documents Findings, Actions, and Outcomes

# 13.4.2 Wireless Client Not Connecting
If there is no connectivity, check the following:

- Confirm the network configuration on the PC using the **ipconfig** command. Verify that the PC has received an IP address via DHCP or is configured with a static IP address.
- Confirm that the device can connect to the wired network. Connect the device to the wired LAN and ping a known IP address.
- If necessary, reload drivers as appropriate for the client. It may be necessary to try a different wireless NIC.
- If the wireless NIC of the client is working, check the security mode and encryption settings on the client. If the security settings do not match, the client cannot gain access to the WLAN.

If the PC is operational but the wireless connection is performing poorly, check the following:

- How far is the PC from an AP? Is the PC out of the planned coverage area (BSA)?
- Check the channel settings on the wireless client. The client software should detect the appropriate channel as long as the SSID is correct.
- Check for the presence of other devices in the area that may be interfering with the 2.4 GHz band. Examples of other devices are cordless phones, baby monitors, microwave ovens, wireless security systems, and potentially rogue APs. Data from these devices can cause interference in the WLAN and intermittent connection problems between a wireless client and AP.

Next, ensure that all the devices are actually in place. Consider a possible physical security issue. Is there power to all devices and are they powered on?

Finally, inspect links between cabled devices looking for bad connectors or damaged or missing cables. If the physical plant is in place, verify the wired LAN by pinging devices, including the AP. If connectivity still fails at this point, perhaps something is wrong with the AP or its configuration.

When the user PC is eliminated as the source of the problem, and the physical status of devices is confirmed, begin investigating the performance of the AP. Check the power status of the AP.

# 13.4.3 Troubleshooting When the Network Is Slow
To optimize and increase the bandwidth of 802.11 dual-band routers and APs, either:

- **Upgrade your wireless clients** - Older 802.11b, 802.11g, and even 802.11n devices can slow the entire WLAN. For the best performance, all wireless devices should support the same highest acceptable standard. Although 802.11ax was released in 2019, 802.11ac is most likely that highest standard that enterprises can currently enforce.
- **Split the traffic** - The easiest way to improve wireless performance is to split the wireless traffic between the 802.11n 2.4 GHz band and the 5 GHz band. Therefore, 802.11n (or better) can use the two bands as two separate wireless networks to help manage the traffic. For example, use the 2.4 GHz network for basic internet tasks, such as web browsing, email, and downloads, and use the 5 GHz band for streaming multimedia.
There are several reasons for using a split-the-traffic approach:

- The 2.4 GHz band may be suitable for basic Internet traffic that is not time-sensitive.
- The bandwidth may still be shared with other nearby WLANs.
- The 5 GHz band is much less crowded than the 2.4 GHz band; ideal for streaming multimedia.
- The 5 GHz band has more channels; therefore, the channel chosen is likely interference-free.

By default, dual-band routers and APs use the same network name on both the 2.4 GHz band and the 5 GHz band. The simplest way to segment traffic is to rename one of the wireless networks. With a separate, descriptive name, it is easier to connect to the right network.

To improve the range of a wireless network, ensure the wireless router or AP location is free of obstructions, such as furniture, fixtures, and tall appliances. These block the signal, which shortens the range of the WLAN. If this still does not solve the problem, then a Wi-Fi Range Extender or deploying the Powerline wireless technology may be used.

# 13.4.4 Updating Firmware
Most wireless routers and APs offer upgradable firmware. Firmware releases may contain fixes for common problems reported by customers as well as security vulnerabilities. You should periodically check the router or AP for updated firmware.

