##Log Aggregation
Process of collecting and consolidating log data from various sources into a centralized location.
Consolidated log data provides insight's about system performance.
- Detect security incidents
- Investigate breaches
- Gather evidence
## Alerting
Involves setting up notification to inform relevant stakeholders when specific events or conditions occurs.
- Issue Resolutions
- Incident Detection
- Compliance
## Scanning
Involves examining systems, networks, or applications to identify vulnerabilities, configurations issues, or other potential problems 
### Vulnerability Scan
Checks for vulnerabilities in systems, networks, or applications by comparing the system's state against databases of vulnerabilities.
### Configuration Scan
Checks for misconfigurations that could impact system performance or security.

### Code Scan
Checks  the source code of an application for potential issues, such as security vulnerabilities or coding errors.
## Reporting 
Involves generating summaries or detailed reports based on the collected and analyzed data.
## Archiving 
Involves storing data for long-term retention and future reference, including organization's log data, performance data, and incident data.
## Alert Response and Remediation or Validation 
Involves taking appropriate actions in response to alerts and ensuring that the identified issues have been effectively addressed.
### Remediation
Steps used to resolve identified issues or vulnerabilities
### Validation
Involves verifying that the remediation implemented was actually successful and has effectively addressed the given issue or vulnerability.
## Quarantining 
Isolating a system, network, or application to prevent the spread or a threat and limit its potential damage.
## Alert Tuning
Adjusting alert parameters  to reduce errors, false positives, and to improve the overall relevance of the alerts being generated by a given system.