# 3.2.1 The Hacker
Hacker is a common term used to describe a threat actor. Originally the term referred to someone who was a skilled computer expert such as a programmer and a hack was a clever solution. The term later evolved into what we know of it today.
The terms white hat hacker, black hat hacker, and gray hat hacker are often used to describe a type of hacker.
# 3.2.2 Evolution of Hackers
Hacking started in the 1960s with phone freaking, or phreaking, which refers to using audio frequencies to manipulate phone systems. At that time, telephone switches used various tones to indicate different functions. Early hackers realized that by mimicking a tone using a whistle, they could exploit the phone switches to make free long-distance calls.

In the mid-1980s, computer dial-up modems were used to connect computers to networks. Hackers wrote “war dialing” programs which dialed each telephone number in a given area in search of computers. When a computer was found, password-cracking programs were used to gain access.
# 3.2.3 Cyber Criminals
It is estimated that cyber criminals steal billions of dollars from consumers and businesses. Cyber criminals operate in an underground economy where they buy, sell, and trade attack toolkits, zero day exploit code, botnet services, banking Trojans, keyloggers, and much more. They also buy and sell the private information and intellectual property they steal. Cyber criminals target small businesses and consumers, as well as large enterprises and entire industries.
# 3.2.4 Hacktivists
Two examples of hacktivist groups are Anonymous and the Syrian Electronic Army. Although most hacktivist groups are not well organized, they can cause significant problems for governments and businesses. Hacktivists tend to rely on fairly basic, freely available tools.
# 3.2.5 State-Sponsored Hackers
State-sponsored hackers create advanced, customized attack code, often using previously undiscovered software vulnerabilities called zero-day vulnerabilities. An example of a state-sponsored attack involves the Stuxnet malware that was created to damage Iran’s nuclear enrichment capabilities.