# 3.6.2 IPv4 and IPv6
IP does not validate whether the source IP address contained in a packet actually came from that source. For this reason, threat actors can send packets using a spoofed source IP address. Threat actors can also tamper with the other fields in the IP header to carry out their attacks. Security analysts must understand the different fields in both the IPv4 and IPv6 headers.

|**IP Attack Techniques**|**Description**|
|---|---|
|**ICMP attacks**|Threat actors use Internet Control Message Protocol (ICMP) echo packets (pings) to discover subnets and hosts on a protected network, to generate DoS flood attacks, and to alter host routing tables.|
|**Amplification and** **reflection attacks**|Threat actors attempt to prevent legitimate users from accessing information or services using DoS and DDoS attacks.|
|**Address spoofing attacks**|Threat actors spoof the source IP address in an IP packet to perform blind spoofing or non-blind spoofing.|
|**Man-in-the-middle attack (MITM)**|Threat actors position themselves between a source and destination to transparently monitor, capture, and control the communication. They could eavesdrop by inspecting captured packets, or alter packets and forward them to their original destination.|
|**Session hijacking**|Threat actors gain access to the physical network, and then use an MITM attack to hijack a session.|
# 3.6.3 ICMP Attacks
Threat actors use ICMP for reconnaissance and scanning attacks. They can launch information-gathering attacks to map out a network topology, discover which hosts are active (reachable), identify the host operating system (OS fingerprinting), and determine the state of a firewall. Threat actors also use ICMP for DoS attacks.

|**ICMP Messages used by Hackers**|**Description**|
|---|---|
|**ICMP echo request and echo reply**|This is used to perform host verification and DoS attacks.|
|**ICMP unreachable**|This is used to perform network reconnaissance and scanning attacks.|
|**ICMP mask reply**|This is used to map an internal IP network.|
|**ICMP redirects**|This is used to lure a target host into sending all traffic through a compromised device and create a MITM attack.|
|**ICMP router discovery**|This is used to inject bogus route entries into the routing table of a target host.|
# 3.6.5 Amplification and Reflection Attacks
- **Amplification** – The threat actor forwards ICMP echo request messages to many hosts. These messages contain the source IP address of the victim.
- **Reflection** – These hosts all reply to the spoofed IP address of the victim to overwhelm it.
**Note:** Newer forms of amplification and reflection attacks such as DNS-based reflection and amplification attacks and Network Time Protocol (NTP) amplification attacks are now being used.

# 3.6.6 Address Spoofing Attacks
Spoofing attacks can be non-blind or blind:

- **Non-blind spoofing** – The threat actor can see the traffic that is being sent between the host and the target. The threat actor uses non-blind spoofing to inspect the reply packet from the target victim. Non-blind spoofing determines the state of a firewall and sequence-number prediction. It can also hijack an authorized session.
- **Blind spoofing** – The threat actor cannot see the traffic that is being sent between the host and the target. Blind spoofing is used in DoS attacks.
MAC address spoofing attacks are used when threat actors have access to the internal network. Threat actors alter the MAC address of their host to match another known MAC address of a target host, as shown in the figure. The attacking host then sends a frame throughout the network with the newly-configured MAC address. When the switch receives the frame, it examines the source MAC address.
The switch overwrites the current CAM table entry and assigns the MAC address to the new port, as shown in the figure. It then forwards frames destined for the target host to the attacking host.