# 3.7.1 TCP Segment Header
The following are the six control bits of the TCP segment:

- **URG** – Urgent pointer field significant
- **ACK** – Acknowledgment field significant
- **PSH** – Push function
- **RST**– Reset the connection
- **SYN** – Synchronize sequence numbers
- **FIN** – No more data from sender
# 3.7.2 TCP Services
TCP provides these services:

- **Reliable delivery** – TCP incorporates acknowledgments to guarantee delivery, instead of relying on upper-layer protocols to detect and resolve errors. If a timely acknowledgment is not received, the sender retransmits the data. Requiring acknowledgments of received data can cause substantial delays. Examples of application layer protocols that make use of TCP reliability include HTTP, SSL/TLS, FTP, DNS zone transfers, and others.
- **Flow control** – TCP implements flow control to address this issue. Rather than acknowledge one segment at a time, multiple segments can be acknowledged with a single acknowledgment segment.
- **Stateful communication** – TCP stateful communication between two parties occurs during the TCP three-way handshake. Before data can be transferred using TCP, a three-way handshake opens the TCP connection, as shown in the figure. If both sides agree to the TCP connection, data can be sent and received by both parties using TCP.
# 3.7.3 TCP Attacks
**TCP SYN Flood Attack**

The TCP SYN Flood attack exploits the TCP three-way handshake. The figure shows a threat actor continually sending TCP SYN session request packets with a randomly spoofed source IP address to a target. The target device replies with a TCP SYN-ACK packet to the spoofed IP address and waits for a TCP ACK packet. Those responses never arrive. Eventually the target host is overwhelmed with half-open TCP connections, and TCP services are denied to legitimate users.

**TCP Reset Attack**

A TCP reset attack can be used to terminate TCP communications between two hosts. The figure displays how TCP uses a four-way exchange to close the TCP connection using a pair of FIN and ACK segments from each TCP endpoint. A TCP connection terminates when it receives an RST bit. This is an abrupt way to tear down the TCP connection and inform the receiving host to immediately stop using the TCP connection. A threat actor could do a TCP reset attack and send a spoofed packet containing a TCP RST to one or both endpoints.

**TCP Session Hijacking**

TCP session hijacking is another TCP vulnerability. Although difficult to conduct, a threat actor takes over an already-authenticated host as it communicates with the target. The threat actor must spoof the IP address of one host, predict the next sequence number, and send an ACK to the other host. If successful, the threat actor could send, but not receive, data from the target device.

# 3.7.4 UDP Segment Header and Operation
UDP is commonly used by DNS, TFTP, NFS, and SNMP. It is also used with real-time applications such as media streaming or VoIP. UDP is a connectionless transport layer protocol. It has much lower overhead than TCP because it is not connection-oriented and does not offer the sophisticated retransmission, sequencing, and flow control mechanisms that provide reliability.

# 3.7.5 UDP Attacks
**UDP Flood Attacks**

You are more likely to see a UDP flood attack. In a UDP flood attack, all the resources on a network are consumed. The threat actor must use a tool like UDP Unicorn or Low Orbit Ion Cannon. These tools send a flood of UDP packets, often from a spoofed host, to a server on the subnet. The program will sweep through all the known ports trying to find closed ports. This will cause the server to reply with an ICMP port unreachable message. Because there are many closed ports on the server, this creates a lot of traffic on the segment, which uses up most of the bandwidth. The result is very similar to a DoS attack.