# 2.2.1 Collision Domains
In legacy hub-based Ethernet segments, network devices competed for the shared medium. The network segments that share the same bandwidth between devices are known as collision domains. When two or more devices within the same collision domain try to communicate at the same time, a collision will occur.

If an Ethernet switch port is operating in half-duplex, each segment is in its own collision domain.
# 2.2.2 Broadcast Domains
A collection of interconnected switches forms a single broadcast domain. Only a network layer device, such as a router, can divide a Layer 2 broadcast domain. Routers are used to segment broadcast domains, but will also segment a collision domain.

When a switch receives a broadcast frame, it forwards the frame out each of its ports, except the ingress port where the broadcast frame was received. Each device connected to the switch receives a copy of the broadcast frame and processes it.

When two switches are connected together, the broadcast domain is increased.

# 2.2.3 Alleviate Network Congestion
Characteristics of switches that alleviate network congestion include the following:
- **Fast port speeds** - Ethernet switch port speeds vary by model and purpose. From 100 Mbps up to 100 Gbps
- **Fast internal switching** - Switches use a fast internal bus or shared memory to provide high performance.
- **Large frame buffers** - Switches use large memory buffers to temporarily store more received frames before having to start dropping them.
- **High port density** - A high port density switch lowers overall costs because it reduces the number of switches required. For instance, if 96 access ports were required, it would be less expensive to buy two 48-port switches instead of four 24-port switches.