# 6.3.1 Network and Host Portions
An IPv4 address is a 32-bit hierarchical address that identifies a network and a host on the network. When determining the network portion versus the host portion, you must look at the 32-bit stream.
# 6.3.2 The Subnet Mask

The IPv4 subnet mask is used to differentiate the network portion from the host portion of an IPv4 address. When an IPv4 address is assigned to a device, the subnet mask is used to determine the network address of the device. The network address represents all the devices on the same network.
# 6.3.3 The Prefix Length
The prefix length is the number of bits set to 1 in the subnet mask. It is written in “slash notation”, which is noted by a forward slash (/) followed by the number of bits set to 1. Therefore, count the number of bits in the subnet mask and prepend it with a slash.
# 6.3.4 Determining the Network - Logical AND
To illustrate how AND is used to discover a network address, consider a host with IPv4 address 192.168.10.10 and subnet mask of 255.255.255.0, as shown in the figure:

- **IPv4 host address (192.168.10.10)** - The IPv4 address of the host in dotted decimal and binary formats.
- **Subnet mask (255.255.255.0)** - The subnet mask of the host in dotted decimal and binary formats.
- **Network address (192.168.10.0)** - The logical AND operation between the IPv4 address and subnet mask results in an IPv4 network address shown in dotted decimal and binary formats.
# 6.3.6 Subnetting Broadcast Domains
The 192.168.10.0/24 network can support 254 hosts. Larger networks, such as 172.16.0.0/16, can support many more host addresses (over 65,000). However, this can potentially create a larger broadcast domain. A problem with a large broadcast domain is that these hosts can generate excessive broadcasts and negatively affect the network.
Subnetting reduces overall network traffic and improves network performance. It also enables an administrator to implement security policies that control which subnets are permitted to communicate with each other, for example.