# 6.4.1 IPv4 Address Classes and Default Subnet Masks

**Address Classes**
In 1981, IPv4 addresses were assigned using classful addressing as defined in RFC 790. Customers were allocated a network address based on one of three classes, A, B, or C. The RFC divided the unicast ranges into specific classes:

- **Class A** (0.0.0.0/8 to 127.0.0.0/8) - Designed to support extremely large networks with more than 16 million host addresses. It used a fixed /8 prefix with the first octet to indicate the network address and the remaining three octets for host addresses.
- **Class B** (128.0.0.0 /16 - 191.255.0.0 /16) - Designed to support the needs of moderate to large size networks with up to approximately 65,000 host addresses. It used a fixed /16 prefix with the two high-order octets to indicate the network address and the remaining two octets for host addresses.
- **Class C** (192.0.0.0 /24 - 223.255.255.0 /24) - Designed to support small networks with a maximum of 254 hosts. It used a fixed /24 prefix with the first three octets to indicate the network and the remaining octet for the host addresses.

**Note:** There is also a Class D multicast block consisting of 224.0.0.0 to 239.0.0.0 and a Class E experimental address block consisting of 240.0.0.0 - 255.0.0.0.
# 6.4.2 Reserved Private Addresses
Public IPv4 addresses are addresses which are globally routed between ISP routers. However, not all available IPv4 addresses can be used on the internet. There are blocks of addresses called private addresses that are used by most organizations to assign IPv4 addresses to internal hosts.

In the mid-1990s, private IPv4 addresses were introduced because of the depletion of IPv4 address space. Private IPv4 addresses are not unique and can be used by any internal network.

These are the private address blocks:
- 10.0.0.0 /8 or 10.0.0.0 to 10.255.255.255
- 172.16.0.0 /12 or 172.16.0.0 to 172.31.255.255
- 192.168.0.0 /16 or 192.168.0.0 to 192.168.255.255
Most organizations use private IPv4 addresses for their internal hosts. However, these RFC 1918 addresses are not routable on the internet and must be translated to a public IPv4 addresses. Network Address Translation (NAT) is used to translate between private IPv4 and public IPv4 addresses. This is usually done on the router that connects the internal network to the ISP's network.

Home routers provide the same capability. For instance, most home routers assign IPv4 addresses to their wired and wireless hosts from the private address of 192.168.1.0 /24. The home router interface that connects to the Internet service provider (ISP) network is often assigned a public IPv4 address to use on the internet.