# Wazuh Server
Central component used to manage the agents and analyze the data received from them:
- Collects logs from several sources such as hosts, network devices, firewalls, proxy servers, and syslog servers.
- Normalizes and standardizes collected logs and events into a uniform format for analysis and correlation. It utilizes the Wazuh decoder to parse logs to display the logs in a uniform format.
- The Wazuh server also provide an API for interaction, allowing remote servers or systems to interact and query, for example, the number of active Wazuh agents, vulnerability information, Wazuh rule verification, and so on.
# Wazuh Indexer
It is responsible for indexing and storing alerts generated by the Wazuh server:
- The Wazuh indexer stores alerts sent by the Wazuh server and acts as a primary repository.
- It's made to handle a lot of security alerts, making sure that storage and indexing work well as the system grows.
- Provides robust search features that make it possible to quickly and thoroughly search thorugh saved alerts usign particular criteria or patterns.
The Indexer uses four index patterns to store the data:
- **wazuh-alerts-\***: This is the index pattern for alerts generated by the Wazuh server.
- **wazuharchives-\***:This is the index pattern for all events sent to the Wazuh server.
- **wazuh-monitoring-\***: For monitoring the status of Wazuh agents.
- **wazuh-statistics-\***: Used for statistical information about the Wazuh server.
# Wazuh Dashboard
Is a web interface that allows you to perform visualization and analysis. It also allows you to create rules, monitor events, monitor regulatory compliances, detect vulnerable application, and much more.