# 8.2.1 SLAAC Overview
The SLAAC method enables hosts to create their own unique IPv6 global unicast address without the services of a DHCPv6 server.
SLAAC is a stateless service.

SLAAC uses ICMPv6 RA messages to provide addressing and other configuration information that would normally be provided by a DHCP server. RA messages are sent by an IPv6 router every 200 seconds.

A host can also send a Router Solicitation (RS) message requesting that an IPv6-enabled router send the host an RA.

SLAAC can be deployed as SLAAC only, or SLAAC with DHCPv6.

# 8.2.2 Enabling SLAAC
**Verify IPv6 Addresses**
**Enable IPv6 Routing**
To enable the sending of RA messages, a router must join the IPv6 all-routers group using:
```
R1(config)# ipv6 unicast-routing
```
**Verify SLAAC is Enabled**
The IPv6 all-router group responds to the IPv6 multicast address ff02::2. You can use the **show ipv6 interface** command to erify if a router is enabled.
```
R1# show ipv6 interface G0/0/1 | section Joined
  Joined group address(es):
    FF02::1
    FF02::2
    FF02::1:FF00:1
R1#
```

# 8.2.3 SLAAC Only Method
The SLAAC only method is enabled by default when the **ipv6 unicast-routing** command is configured.

The A = 1 flag suggests to the client that it create its own IPv6 GUA using the prefix advertised in the TA. The client can create its own Interface ID using either Extended Unique Identifier method (EUI-64) or have it randomly generated.

The O= 0 and M= 0 flags instruct the client to use the information in the RA message exclusively. The RA includes the prefix, prefix-length, DNS server, MTU, and default gateway information. 

# 8.2.4 ICMPv6 RS Messages
The router sends RA messages every 200 seconds. However, it will also send an RA messages if it receives an RS message from a host.
When a client is configured to obtain its addressing information automatically, it sends an RS message to the IPv6 all-routers multicast of ff02::2

1. PC1 has just booted and has not yet received an RA message. Therefore, it sends an RS message to the IPv6 all-routers multicast address of ff02::2 requesting an RA
2. R1 is part of the IPv6 all-routers group and received the RS message. It generates an RA containing the local network prefix and prefix length. It then sends the RA message to the IPv6 all-nodes multicast address of ff02::1. PC1 uses his information to create a unique IPv6 GUA
# 8.2.5 Host Process to Generate Interface ID

Using SLAAC, a host typically acquires its 64-bit IPv6 subnet information from the router RA. However, it must generate the remainder 64-bit interface identifier (ID) using one of two methods:
- **Randomly generated** - The 64-bit interface ID is randomly generated by the client operating system.
- **EUI-64** - The host creates an interface ID using its 48-bit MAC address. The host inserts the hex value of fffe in the middle of the address, and flips the seventh bit of the interface ID. This changes the value of the second hexadecimal digit of the interface ID. Some operating systems default to the randomly generated interface ID instead of the EUI-64 method, due to privacy concerns. This is because the Ethernet MAC address of the host is used by the EUI-64 to create the interface ID.
# 8.2.6 Duplicate Address Detection
The Duplicate Address Detection (DAD) process is used by a host to ensure that the IPv6 GUA is unique.
DAD is implemented using ICMPv6. The host sends a Neighbor Solicitation (NS) message with a specially constructed multicast address, called a solicited-node multicas address. This address duplicates the last 24 bits of IPv6 address of the host.

If no devices respond with a NA message, the address is unique and can be used.
The IETF recommends that DAD is used on all IPv6 unicast addresses.
