# 7.1.1 DHCPv4 Server and Client
Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol v4 (DHCPv4) assigns IPv4 Addresses and other network configuration information dynamically.

The DHCP server assigns IPV4 addresses from a pool for a limited period of time.
# 7.1.2 DHCPv4 Operation
DHCPv4 works in a client/server mode. When a client communicates with a DHCPv4 server, the server assigns or leases an IPv4 address to that client.

# 7.1.3 Steps to Obtain a Lease
**Step 1. DHCP Discover**
The client sends a broadcast DHCPDISCOVER message with its own MAC address to discover DHCPv4 servers. It uses L2 and L3 broadcast messages.

**Step 2. DHCP Offer**
When a DHCPv4 server receives the DHCPDISCOVER message, it resreves an available IPv4 address to lease to the client. The DHCPv4 server sends the binding DHCPOFFER message to the requesting client.

**Step 3. DHCP Request**
When the client receives the DHCPOFFER from the server, it sends back a DHCPREQUEST message. This message is used for both lease origination and lease renewal. Is sent as a broadcast.

**Step 4. DCHP Acknowledgement**
On receiveing the request message, the server may veirfy the lease infomrationn with an ICMP ping to that address to ensure it is not being used already, it will create a new ARP entry for the cleint lease, and reply with a DHCPACK.

# 7.1.4 Steps to Renew a Lease
**1. DHCP Request**
Before the lease expires, the client sends a DHCPREQUEST message directly to the DHCPv4 server. If DHCPACK is not received within a specified amount of time, the client broadcast another DHCPREQUEST.

**2. DHCP Acknowledgment**
On receiving the request, the server verifies the lease information by returing a DHCPACK.

Note: these messages can be sent as unicast or broadcast ad to IETF RFC 2131.
