# 7.2.2 Steps to Configure a Cisco IOS DHCPv4 Server
**Step 1.** Exclude IPv4 addresses.
**Step 2.** Define a DHCPv4 pool name.
**Step 3.** Configure the DHCPv4 pool.

**Step 1. Exclude IPv4 Addresses**
The router functioning as the DHCPv4 server assigns all IPv4 addresses in a DHCPv4 address pool unless it is configured to exclude specific addresses.

```
Router(config)# ip dhcp excluded-address <low-address> [high-address]
```

**Step 2. Define a DHCPv4 Pool Name**
```
Router(config)# ip dhcp pool pool-name
Router(dhcp-config)#
```

**Step 3. Configure the DHCPv4 Pool**
	**Define the address pool**
	`network <network-number> [mask | /prefix-length]`
	**Define the default gateway**
	`default-router <address> [address2...address8]`
	**Define a DNS server**
	`dns-server address [address2...address8]`
	**Define the domain name**
	`domain-name <domain>`
	**Define the duration of the DHCP lease**
	`lease {days [hours [minutes]] | infinite}`
	**Define the NetBIOS WINS server**
	`netbios-name-server address [address2...address8]`

# 7.2.3 Configuration Example
```
R1(config)# ip dhcp excluded-address 192.168.10.1 192.168.10.9
R1(config)# ip dhcp excluded-address 192.168.10.254
R1(config)# ip dhcp pool LAN-POOL-1
R1(dhcp-config)# network 192.168.10.0 255.255.255.0
R1(dhcp-config)# default-router 192.168.10.1
R1(dhcp-config)# dns-server 192.168.11.5
R1(dhcp-config)# domain-name example.com
R1(dhcp-config)# end
R1#
```

# 7.2.4 DHCPv4 Verification Commands

**Display DHCPv4 commands configured on the router.**
`show running-config | section dhcp`

**Display a list of all IPv4 address to MAC address bindings provided by the DHCPv4 service**
`show ip dhcp binding`

**Display count information regarding the number of DHCPv4 messages that have been sent and received.**
`show ip dhcp server statistics` 

# 7.2.7 Disable the Cisco IOS DHCPv4 Server
```
R1(config)# no service dhcp
```
**Note:** Clearing the DHCP bindings or stopping and restarting the DHCP service may result in duplicate IP addresses being temporarily assigned on the network.

# 7.2.8 DHCPv4 Relay
In a complex hierarchical network, enterprise servers are usually located centrally. These servers may provide DHCP, DNS, TFTP, and FTP services for the network. Network clients are not typically on the same subnet as those servers. In order to locate the servers and receive services, clients often use broadcast messages.

The network administrator releases all current IPv4 addressing information using the **ipconfig /release** command.
Next, the network administrator attempts to renew the IPv4 addressing information with the **ipconfig /renew** command.

A better solution is to configure R1 with the **ip helper-address** _address_ interface configuration command. This will cause R1 to relay DHCPv4 broadcasts to the DHCPv4 server.
The network administrator can use the **show ip interface** command to verify the configuration.

# 7.2.9 Other Service Broadcasts Relayed
DHCPv4 is not the only service that the router can be configured to relay. By default, the **ip helper-address** command forwards the following eight UDP services:

- Port 37: Time
- Port 49: TACACS
- Port 53: DNS
- Port 67: DHCP/BOOTP server
- Port 68: DHCP/BOOTP client
- Port 69: TFTP
- Port 137: NetBIOS name service
- Port 138: NetBIOS datagram service