# 17.2.1 HTTP and HTTPS
To investigate web-based attacks, security analysts must have a good understanding of how a standard web-based attack works. These are the common stages of a typical web attack:

1. The victim unknowingly visits a web page that has been compromised by malware.
2. The compromised web page redirects the user, often through many compromised servers, to a site containing malicious code.
3. The user visits this site with malicious code and their computer becomes infected. This is known as a drive by download. When the user visits the site, an exploit kit scans the software running on the victim’s computer including the OS, Java, or Flash player looking for an exploit in the software. The exploit kit is often a PHP script and provides the attacker with a management console to manage the attack.
4. After identifying a vulnerable software package running on the victim’s computer, the exploit kit contacts the exploit kit server to download code that can use the vulnerability to run malicious code on the victim’s computer.
5. After the victim’s computer has been compromised, it connects to the malware server and downloads a payload. This could be malware, or a file download service that downloads other malware.
6. The final malware package is run on the victim’s computer.
Server connection logs can often reveal information about the type of scan or attack. The different types of connection status codes are listed here:

- **Informational 1xx** – This is a provisional response, consisting only of the Status-Line and optional headers. It is terminated by an empty line. There are no required headers for this class of status code. Servers MUST NOT send a 1xx response to an HTTP/1.0 client except under experimental conditions.
- **Successful 2xx** – The client’s request was successfully received, understood, and accepted.
- **Redirection 3xx** – Further action must be taken by the user agent to fulfill the request. A client SHOULD detect infinite redirection loops, because these loops generate network traffic for each redirection.
- **Client Error 4xx** – For cases in which the client seems to have erred. Except when responding to a HEAD request, the server SHOULD include an entity containing an explanation of the situation, and if it is temporary. User agents SHOULD display any included entity to the user.
- **Server Error 5xx** – For cases where the server is aware that it has erred, or it cannot perform the request. Except when responding to a HEAD request, the server SHOULD include an entity containing an explanation of the error situation, and if it is temporary. User agents SHOULD display any included entity to the user.
# 17.2.2 Common HTTP Exploits
**Malicious iFrames**
An iFrame is an HTML element that allows the browser to load another web page from another source. iFrame attacks have become very common, as they are often used to insert advertisements from other sources into the page. Threat actors compromise a webserver and modify web pages by adding HTML for the malicious iFrame. The HTML links to the threat actor’s webserver. In some instances, the iFrame page that is loaded consists of only a few pixels. This makes it very hard for the user to see. Because the iFrame is run in the page, it can be used to deliver a malicious exploit, such as spam advertising, an exploit kit, and other malware.

**HTTP 302 Cushioning**
Another type of HTTP attack is the HTTP 302 cushioning attack. Threat actors use the 302 Found HTTP response status code to direct the user’s web browser to a new location. Threat actors often use legitimate HTTP functions such as HTTP redirects to carry out their attacks. HTTP allows servers to redirect a client’s HTTP request to a different server.

**Domain Shadowing**
When a threat actor wishes to create a domain shadowing attack, the threat actor must first compromise a domain. Then, the threat actor must create multiple subdomains of that domain to be used for the attacks. Hijacked domain registration logins are then used to create the many subdomains needed. After these subdomains have been created, attackers can use them as they wish, even if they are found out to be malicious domains. They can simply make more from the parent domain. The following sequence is typically used by threat actors:

1. A website becomes compromised.
2. HTTP 302 cushioning is used to send the browser to malicious websites.
3. Domain shadowing is used to direct the browser to a compromised server.
4. An exploit kit landing page is accessed.
5. Malware downloads from the exploit kit landing page.

# 17.2.3 Email
The following are examples of email threats:

- **Attachment-based attacks** – Threat actors embed malicious content in business files such as an email from the IT department. Legitimate users open malicious content. Malware is used in broad attacks often targeting a specific business vertical to seem legitimate, enticing users working in that vertical to open attachments, or click embedded links.
- **Email spoofing** – Threat actors create email messages with a forged sender address that is meant to fool the recipient into providing money or sensitive information. For example, a bank sends you an email asking you to update your credentials. When this email displays the identical bank logo as mail you have previously opened that was legitimate, it has a higher chance of being opened, having attachments opened and links clicked. The spoofed email may even ask you to verify your credentials so that the bank is assured that you are you, exposing your login information.
- **Spam email** – Threat actors send unsolicited email containing advertisements or malicious files. This type of email is sent most often to solicit a response, telling the threat actor that the email is valid and a user has opened the spam.
- **Open mail relay server** – Threat actors take advantage of enterprise servers that are misconfigured as open mail relays to send large volumes of spam or malware to unsuspecting users. The open mail relay is an SMTP server that allows anybody on the internet to send mail. Because anyone can use the server, they are vulnerable to spammers and worms. Very large volumes of spam can be sent by using an open mail relay. It is important that corporate email servers are never set up as an open relay. This will considerably reduce the amount of unsolicited emails.
- **Homoglyphs** – Threat actors can use text characters that are very similar or even identical to legitimate text characters. For example, it can be difficult to distinguish between an O (upper case letter O) and a 0 (number zero) or a l (lower case “L”) and a 1 (number one). These can be used in phishing emails to make them look very convincing. In DNS, these characters are very different from the real thing. When the DNS record is searched, a completely different URL is found when the link with the homoglyph is used in the search.

# 17.2.4 Web-Exposed Databases
**Code Injection**
Attackers are able to execute commands on a web server’s OS through a web application that is vulnerable. This might occur if the web application provides input fields to the attacker for entering malicious data. The attacker’s commands are executed through the web application and have the same permissions as the web application. This type of attack is used because often there is insufficient validation of input. An example is when a threat actor injects PHP code into an insecure input field on server page.

**SQL Injection**
SQL is the language used to query a relational database. Threat actors use SQL injections to breach the relational database, create malicious SQL queries, and obtain sensitive data from the relational database.

### 17.2.5 Client-side Scripting

**Cross-Site Scripting**

Not all attacks are initiated from the server side. Cross-Site Scripting (XSS) is where web pages that are executed on the client-side, within their own web browser, are injected with malicious scripts. These scripts can be used by Visual Basic, JavaScript, and others to access a computer, collect sensitive information, or deploy more attacks and spread malware. As with SQL injection, this is often due to the attacker posting content to a trusted website with a lack of input validation. Future visitors to the trusted web site will be exposed to the content provided by the attacker.

These are the two main types of XSS:

- **Stored (persistent)** – This is permanently stored on the infected server and is received by all visitors to the infected page.
- **Reflected (non-persistent)** – This only requires that the malicious script is located in a link and visitors must click the infected link to become infected.