# 17.2.1 Potential STP Problems
**Rogue Switch**
1. Implement **BPDU Guard** on access ports to prevent the connection of unauthorized switches.
2. Implement **Root Guard** on the root bridge ports to protect the root bridge selection.

**Unnecessary BPDU Traffic**
1. Implement **BPDU Filter** on access ports to control BPDU propagation.

**Unidirectional BPDUs**
1. Implement **Loop Guard** to detect and mitigate Layer 2 loops that may occur due to unidirectional link failures.
# 17.2.2 STP Enhancement Mechanisms

| STP Stability Mechanism                  | Description                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
| ---------------------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| **PortFast**                             | - Feature enables access ports connecting to end devices to transition directly to the forwarding state.<br>- Therefore, the port bypasses the listening and learning state.                                                                                |
| **BPDU Guard**                           | - Feature prevents unauthorized switches or devices from introducing loops in the networks.<br>- When a BPDU is received on a BPDU Guard enabled port, the port is automatically disabled to prevent potential loops<br>                                    |
| **BPDU Filter**                          | - Feature enforces the root bridge placement.<br>- It ensures that no unauthorized switches can become the root bridge.                                                                                                                                     |
| **UDLD (Unidirectional Link Detection)** | - Feature detects unidirectional links between switches.<br>- It prevents forwarding loops when traffic flows in only one direction.<br>                                                                                                                    |
| **Bridge Assurance**                     | - Feature ensures the health of the STP topology by exchanging BPDUs between switches on designated ports.<br>- If BPDUs are not received on a designated port for a certain period, the port transitions to the blocking state to prevent potential loops. |
# 17.2.3 BPDU Guard
BPDU Guard is an RSTP feature used to prevent accidental network loops caused by misconfigured ports or unauthorized switches. BPDU Guard enhances network security and helps protect the network against loops that can occur when unauthorized switches are connected or when ports are inadvertently configured to create loops.

If a BPDU Guard-enabled port receives a BPDU:

- It triggers a security mechanism that puts the port into an error-disabled state and immediately disables (shuts down) the port.
- The switch logs the event of the port being placed into an error-disabled state.

An administrator must investigate the reason the port error-disabled and address the underlying issue. To restore the port functionality, manually re-enable the port using a **shutdown** command followed by a **no shutdown** command.

BPDU Guard should be configured on:

- Access ports connecting to end devices (workstations, printers, etc.).
- Ports connecting to servers or virtualization hosts that do not participate in the STP topology.

**Note**: BPDU guard is often enabled on an access port with PortFast configured.

```
S3(config)# interface Fa0/23 
S3(config-if)# switchport mode access 
S3(config-if)# spanning-tree portfast 
%Warning: portfast should only be enabled on ports connected to a single  host. Connecting hubs, concentrators, switches, bridges, etc... to this  interface  when portfast is enabled, can cause temporary bridging loops.  Use with CAUTION   
%Portfast has been configured on FastEthernet0/23 but will only  have effect when the interface is in a non-trunking mode. 
S3(config-if)# 
S3(config-if)# spanning-tree bpduguard enable 
S3(config-if)# 
```

# 17.2.5 BPDU Filter
Configuring BPDU filter on a port prevents the forwarding and receiving of BPDUs on that port.

BPDU filtering could be used on switch ports connected to end devices to avoid unnecessary BPDU processing. It can also be used in scenarios to prevent a segment of the network from participating in the STP topology. This could be useful for isolating parts of the network or when using alternative loop prevention mechanisms.

Enabling BPDU filtering on ports should be done carefully. If enabled improperly, it can lead to network loops or other connectivity issues. It is typically recommended to use BPDU filtering only on access ports where end devices are connected, rather than on ports connected to other switches or network infrastructure.

If a BPDU filter-enabled port receives a BPDU, it ignores it, and the port remains functional.

**Note:** Unlike BPDU Guard which disables the port if a BPDU is received, BPDU Filter ignores the BPDUs to prevent any type of change to the existing STP topology.

BPDU Filter is best configured on:

- Access ports connecting to end devices to avoid unnecessary BPDU processing.
- Trunk links connecting to a VM server to reduce unnecessary BPDU traffic.
- Ports connected to isolated network segments where STP is not desired.

**Caution:** Do not configure a port with BPDU Guard and BPDU Filter. Enabling both on the same interface effectively cancels the BPDU Guard feature. Specifically, a port configured with both features will not error-disable the port when a BPDU is received. Instead, it will default to the BPDU Filter and simply ignore the BPDUs.
```
S4(config)# interface Fa0/23 
S4(config-if)# switchport mode trunk
  *Jun  1 00:24:42.493: %LINEPROTO-5-UPDOWN: Line protocol on Interface FastEthernet0/23, changed state to down
  *Jun  1 00:24:45.504: %LINEPROTO-5-UPDOWN: Line protocol on Interface FastEthernet0/23, changed state to up 
S4(config-if)# 
S4(config-if)# spanning-tree bpdufilter enable 
S4(config-if)# no shut 
S4(config-if)# end 
S4#
```
# 17.2.7 Root Guard

The STP root guard is a feature designed to protect the root bridge in a spanning tree network.

STP root guard prevents unintended root bridge changes which could lead to suboptimal network paths or network instability. It prevents unauthorized switches from becoming the root bridge by monitoring designated ports for superior BPDUs and blocking traffic on ports that receive such BPDUs. This effectively mitigates the risk of accidental or intentional root bridge manipulation.

If a root-guard-enabled port receives BPDUs that are superior to those that the current root bridge is sending:

- The port is moved to a root-inconsistent state. This effectively is equal to an STP listening state, and no data traffic is forwarded across that port.
- The switch logs the event of the port being placed into a root-inconsistent state.

**Note**: Ports in root-inconsistent state recover automatically after the port stop receiving superior BPDUs. Unlike BPDU guard, manual intervention is not required.

```
S1(config)# int range  F0/1 - 3 
S1(config-if-range)# spanning-tree guard root 
S1(config-if-range)# 
*Jun 12 20:30:23.727: %SPANTREE-2-ROOTGUARD_CONFIG_CHANGE: Root guard enabled on port FastEthernet0/1. 
*Jun 12 20:30:23.735: %SPANTREE-2-ROOTGUARD_CONFIG_CHANGE: Root guard enabled on port FastEthernet0/2. 
*Jun 12 20:30:23.747: %SPANTREE-2-ROOTGUARD_CONFIG_CHANGE: Root guard enabled on port FastEthernet0/3. 
S1(config-if-range)# end S1#
```

# 17.2.9 Loop Guard
Loop Guard prevents alternate or root ports on point-to-point links from becoming designated ports because of a unidirectional link failure. A unidirectional link failure can cause a switch to stop receiving Bridge Protocol Data Units (BPDUs) from its neighbor on that link. If the switch continues to forward traffic out of the affected port without receiving BPDUs, it could inadvertently create a network loop.

This feature is most effective when it is configured on the entire switched network. Loop guard operates only on point-to-point non-edge ports.

Loop Guard monitors the receipt of BPDUs on designated ports. If Loop Guard detects that BPDUs are no longer being received on a designated port that is supposed to be receiving them, it places the port into a "_loop-inconsistent_" state.

When a port is placed into a loop-inconsistent state by Loop Guard, the port is effectively disabled for forwarding traffic until it starts receiving BPDUs again. This prevents the switch from participating in the spanning tree topology until the link is restored or the issue is resolved.

If a switch receives a BPDU on a port in the loop-inconsistent state, the port is re-enabled and transitions through STP states according to the received BPDU. As a result, recovery is automatic, and no manual intervention is necessary.

By preventing switches from accidentally forwarding traffic out of ports experiencing unidirectional link failures, Loop Guard enhances network stability and prevents the creation of unintended loops that could disrupt network operations.

**Note:** Loop guard and root guard should be configured together. While Root Guard protects against unauthorized switches attempting to become the root bridge, Loop Guard protects against unintended loops caused by link failures. Together, these features help maintain the integrity and stability of the spanning tree topology.

```
S4(config)# interface Fa0/23  
S4(config-if)# switchport mode trunk 
S4(config-if)# spanning-tree guard loop  
S4(config-if)# end 
S4#
```
