# 25.1.1 Alert Data
Alert data consists of messages generated by intrusion prevention systems (IPSs) or intrusion detection systems (IDSs) in response to traffic that violates a rule or matches the signature of a known exploit. A network IDS (NIDS), such as Snort, comes configured with rules for known exploits. Alerts are generated by Snort and are made readable and searchable by the Sguil and Squert applications, which are part of the Security Onion suite of NSM tools.

A testing site that is used to determine if Snort is operating is the tesmyids site. Search for it on the internet. It consists of a single webpage that displays only the following text **uid=0(root) gid=0(root) groups=0(root)**. If Snort is operating correctly and a host visits this site, a signature will be matched and an alert will be triggered. This is an easy and harmless way to verify that the NIDS is running.

The Snort rule that is triggered is:

`alert ip any any -> any any (msg:"GPL ATTACK\_RESPONSE id check returned root"; content:"uid=0|28|root|29|"; fast\_pattern:only; classtype:bad-unknown; sid:2100498; rev:8;)`

This rule generates an alert if **any IP address** in the network receives data from an external source that contains content with text matching the pattern of **uid=0(root)**. The alert contains the message **GPL ATTACK_RESPONSE id check returned root**. The ID of the Snort rule that was triggered is **2100498**.

# 25.1.2 Session and Transaction Data

Session data is a record of a conversation between two network endpoints, which are often a client and a server. The server could be inside the enterprise network or at a location accessed over the internet. Session data is data about the session, not the data retrieved and used by the client. Session data will include identifying information such as the five tuples of source and destination IP addresses, source and destination port numbers, and the IP code for the protocol in use. Data about the session typically includes a session ID, the amount of data transferred by source and destination, and information related to the duration of the session.

Transaction data consists of the messages that are exchanged during network sessions. These transactions can be viewed in packet capture transcripts. Device logs kept by servers also contain information about the transactions that occur between clients and servers. For example, a session might include the downloading of content from a webserver, as shown in the figure. The transactions that represent the requests and replies would be logged in an access log on the server or by a NIDS like Zeek. The session is all traffic involved in making up the request, the transaction is the request itself.

### 25.1.3 Full Packet Captures

Full packet captures are the most detailed network data that is generally collected. Because of the amount of detail, they are also the most storage and retrieval intensive types of data used in NSM. Full packet captures contain not only data about network conversations, like session data. Full packet captures also contain the actual contents of the conversations. Full packet captures contain the text of email messages, the HTML in webpages, and the files that enter or leave the network. Extracted content can be recovered from full packet captures and analyzed for malware or user behavior that violates business and security policies. The familiar tool Wireshark is very popular for viewing full packet captures and accessing the data associated with network conversations.

### 25.1.4 Statistical Data

Like session data, statistical data is about network traffic. Statistical data is created through the analysis of other forms of network data. Conclusions can be made that describe or predict network behavior from these analysis. Statistical characteristics of normal network behavior can be compared to current network traffic in an effort to detect anomalies. Statistics can be used to characterize normal amounts of variation in network traffic patterns in order to identify network conditions that are significantly outside of those ranges. Statistically significant differences should raise alarms and prompt investigation.

Network Behavior Analysis (NBA) and Network Behavior Anomaly Detection (NBAD) are approaches to network security monitoring that use advanced analytical techniques to analyze NetFlow or Internet Protocol Flow Information Export (IPFIX) network telemetry data. Techniques such as predictive analytics and artificial intelligence perform advanced analyses of detailed session data to detect potential security incidents.

Cognitive Threat Analytics is a cloud-based product that uses machine learning and statistical modeling of networks. It creates a baseline of the traffic in a network and identifies anomalies. It analyzes user and device behavior, and web traffic, to discover command-and-control communications, data exfiltration, and potentially unwanted applications operating in the infrastructure.

