# 22.3.1 Attack Surface
The SANS Institute describes three components of the attack surface:

- **Network Attack Surface** - The attack exploits vulnerabilities in networks. This can include conventional wired and wireless network protocols, as well as other wireless protocols used by smartphones or IoT devices. Network attacks also exploit vulnerabilities at the network and transport layers.
- **Software Attack Surface** - The attack is delivered through exploitation of vulnerabilities in web, cloud, or host-based software applications.
- **Human Attack Surface** - The attack exploits weaknesses in user behavior. Such attacks include social engineering, malicious behavior by trusted insiders, and user error.

# 22.3.2 Application Block Listing and Allow Listing
One way of decreasing the attack surface is to limit access to potential threats by creating lists of prohibited applications. This is known as block listing.

Application block lists can dictate which user applications are not permitted to run on a computer. Similarly, allow lists can specify which programs are allowed to run.

# 22.3.3 System-Based Sandboxing
Sandboxing is a technique that allows suspicious files to be executed and analyzed in a safe environment. Automated malware analysis sandboxes offer tools that analyze malware behavior. These tools observe the effects of running unknown malware so that features of malware behavior can be determined and then used to create defenses against it.
As mentioned previously, polymorphic malware changes frequently and new malware appears regularly. Malware will enter the network despite the most robust perimeter and host-based security systems. HIDS and other detection systems can create alerts on suspected malware that may have entered the network and executed on a host. Systems such as Cisco AMP can track the trajectory of a file through the network, and can “roll back” network events to obtain a copy of the downloaded file. This file can then be executed in a sandbox, such as Cisco Threat Grid Glovebox, and the activities of the file documented by the system. This information can then be used to create signatures to prevent the file from entering the network again. The information can also be used to create detection rules and automated plays that will identify other systems that have been infected.

Cuckoo Sandbox is a popular free malware analysis system sandbox. It can be run locally and have malware samples submitted to it for analysis. A number of other online public sandboxes exist. These services allow malware samples to be uploaded for analysis. Some of these services are VirusTotal, Joe Sandbox, and CrowdStrike Falcon Sandbox.

An interesting online tool is ANY.RUN, which is shown in the figure. It offers the ability to upload a malware sample for analysis like any online sandbox. However, it offers a very rich interactive reporting functionality that is full of details regarding the malware sample. ANY.RUN runs the malware and captures a series of screen shots of the malware if it has interactive elements that display on the sandbox computer screen. You can view public samples that have been submitted by ANY.RUN users to investigate information about newly discovered malware or malware that is currently circulating on the internet. Reports include network and internet activity of the malware, including HTTP requests and DNS queries. Files that are executed as part of the malware process are shown and rated for threat. Details are available for the files including multiple hash values, hexadecimal and ASCII views of the file contents, and the system changes made by the files. In addition, identifying indicators of compromise, such as the malware file hashes, DNS requests, and the IP connections that are made by the malware are also shown. Finally, the tactics taken by the malware are mapped to the MITRE ATT&CK Matrix with each tactic linked to details on the MITRE website.