# 1.1.1 Introduction to OSPF 
Open Shortest Path First is a link-state routing protocol that was developed as an alternative for the distance vector Routing Information Protocol (RIP). RIP was an acceptable routing protocol in the early days of networking. However, the RIP reliance on hop count as the only metric for determining best route quickly became problematic.

OSPF is a link-state routing protocol that uses the concept of areas. A network administrator can divide the routing domain into distinct areas that help control routing update traffic. A link is an interface on a router. Information about the state of a link is known as link-state. All link-state information includes the network prefix, prefix length, and cost.

OSPF uses the SPF algorithm to choose the best path. Routing changes trigger routing updates (no 30-second updates). In IPv4, OSPF uses MD5 authentication between two neighboring OSPF routers. In IPv6, OSPFv3 does not include any authentication capabilities of its own. Instead it relies entirely on IPsec to secure communications between neighbors. Routers can be grouped into areas to support a hierarchical system.​

# 1.1.2 Components of OSPF
**Routing Protocol Messages**
- Hello packet
- Database description packet
- Link-state request packet
- Link-state update packet
- Link-state acknowledgement packet
These packets are used to discover neighboring routers and also to exchange routing information to maintain accurate information about the network.

**Data Structures**

| Database            | Table          | Description                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
| ------------------- | -------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Adjacency Database  | Neighbor Table | List of all neighbor routers to which a router has established bidirectional communication. This table is unique for each router. Can be viewed using **show ip ospf neighbor** command.                                                                 |
| Link-state Database | Topology Table | Lists information about all other routers in the network. This database represents the network topology. All routers within an area have identical LSDB. Can be viewed using the **show ip ospf database** command.                                      |
| Forwarding Database | Routing Table  | List of routers generated when an algorithm is run on the link-state database. The routing table of each router is unique and contains information on how and where to send packets to other routers. Can be viewed using the **show ip route** command. |
**Algorithm**
The router builds the topology table using results of calculation based on the Dijkstra shortest-path first (SPF) algorithm. The SPF algorithm is based on the cumulative cost to reach a destination.
The SPF algorithm creates an SPF tree by placing each router at the root of the tree and calculating the shortest path to each node. The SPF tree is then used to calculate the best routes. OSPF places the best routes into the forwarding database, which is used to make the routing table.

# 1.1.3 Link-State Operation
To maintain routing information, OSPF routers complete a generic link-state routing process to reach a state of convergence.The following are the link-state routing steps that are completed by a router:
1. Establish Neighbor Adjacencies:
	OSPF-enabled routers must recognize each other on the network before they can share information. An OSPF-enabled router sends Hello packets out all OSPF-enabled interfaces to determine if neighbors are present on those links. If a neighbor is present, the OSPF-enabled router attempts to establish a neighbor adjacency with that neighbor.
2. Exchange Link-State Advertisements:
	After adjacencies are established, routers then exchange link-state advertisements (LSAs). LSAs contain the state and cost of each directly connected link. Routers flood their LSAs to adjacent neighbors. Adjacent neighbors receiving the LSA immediately flood the LSA to other directly connected neighbors, until all routers in the area have all LSAs.
3. Build the Link State Database
	After LSAs are received, OSPF-enabled routers build the topology table (LSDB) based on the received LSAs. This database eventually holds all the information about the topology of the area.
4. Execute the SPF Algorithm
	 Routers then execute the SPF algorithm. The SPF algorithm creates the SPF tree.
5. Choose the Best Route
	 After the SPF tree is built, the best paths to each network are offered to the IP routing table. The route will be inserted into the routing table unless there is a route source to the same network with a lower administrative distance, such as a static route. Routing decisions are made based on the entries in the routing table.
# 1.1.4 Single-Area and Multiarea OSPF
To make OSPF more efficient and scalable, OSPF supports hierarchical routing using areas. An OSPF area is a group of routers that share the same link-state information in their LSDBs. OSPF can be implemented in one of two ways, as follows:

- **Single-Area OSPF** - All routers are in one area. Best practice is to use area 0.
- **Multiarea OSPF** - OSPF is implemented using multiple areas, in a hierarchical fashion. All areas must connect to the backbone area (area 0). Routers interconnecting the areas are referred to as Area Border Routers (ABRs).
# 1.1.5 Multiarea OSPF
With multiarea OSPF, one large routing domain can be divided into smaller areas, to support hierarchical routing. Routing still occurs between the areas (interarea routing), while many of the processor intensive routing operations, such as recalculating the database, are kept within an area.

**Note:** Routers in other areas receive updates regarding topology changes, but these routers only update the routing table, not rerun the SPF algorithm.

The hierarchical-topology design options with multiarea OSPF can offer the following advantages.

- **Smaller routing tables** - Tables are smaller because there are fewer routing table entries. This is because network addresses can be summarized between areas. Route summarization is not enabled by default.
- **Reduced link-state update overhead** - Designing multiarea OSPF with smaller areas minimizes processing and memory requirements.
- **Reduced frequency of SPF calculations** - Multiarea OSPF localize the impact of a topology change within an area. For instance, it minimizes routing update impact because LSA flooding stops at the area boundary.
# 1.1.6 OSPFv3
OSPFv3 is the OSPFv2 equivalent for exchanging IPv6 prefixes. Recall that in IPv6, the network address is referred to as the prefix and the subnet mask is called the prefix-length.

Similar to its IPv4 counterpart, OSPFv3 exchanges routing information to populate the IPv6 routing table with remote prefixes.

OSPFv3 has the same functionality as OSPFv2, but uses IPv6 as the network layer transport, communicating with OSPFv3 peers and advertising IPv6 routes. OSPFv3 also uses the SPF algorithm as the computation engine to determine the best paths throughout the routing domain.