# 28.3.1 Diamond Model Overview
The four core features of an intrusion event are adversary, capability, infrastructure, and victim:

- **Adversary** – These are the parties responsible for the intrusion.
- **Capability** – This is a tool or technique that the adversary uses to attack the victim.
- **Infrastructure** – This is the network path or paths that the adversaries use to establish and maintain command and control over their capabilities.
- **Victim** – This is the target of the attack. However, a victim might be the target initially and then used as part of the infrastructure to launch other attacks.

The adversary uses capabilities over infrastructure to attack the victim. The model can be interpreted as saying, “The adversary uses the infrastructure to connect to the victim. The adversary develops capability to exploit the victim.” For example, a capability like malware might be used over the email infrastructure by an adversary to exploit a victim.

Meta-features expand the model slightly to include the following important elements:

- **Timestamp** – This indicates the start and stop time of an event and is an integral part of grouping malicious activity.
- **Phase** – This is analogous to steps in the Cyber Kill Chain; malicious activity includes two or more steps executed in succession to achieve the desired result.
- **Result** – This delineates what the adversary gained from the event. Results can be documented as one or more of the following: confidentiality compromised, integrity compromised, and availability compromised.
- **Direction** – This indicates the direction of the event across the Diamond Model. These include Adversary-to-Infrastructure, Infrastructure-to-Victim, Victim-to-Infrastructure, and Infrastructure-to-Adversary.
- **Methodology** – This is used to classify the general type of event, such as port scan, phishing, content delivery attack, syn flood, etc.
- **Resources** – These are one or more external resources used by the adversary for the intrusion event, such as software, adversary’s knowledge, information (e.g., username/passwords), and assets to carry out the attack (hardware, funds, facilities, network access).
# 28.3.2 Pivoting Across the Diamond Model
As a cybersecurity analyst, you may be called on to use the Diamond Model of Intrusion Analysis to diagram a series of intrusion events. The Diamond Model is ideal for illustrating how the adversary pivots from one event to the next.
# 28.3.3 The Diamond Model and the Cyber Kill Chain
Adversaries do not operate in just a single event. Instead, events are threaded together in a chain in which each event must be successfully completed before the next event. This thread of events can be mapped to the Cyber Kill Chain previously discussed in the chapter.
