# 14.2.2 The Data Formats Concept
Data formats are simply a way to store and exchange data in a structured format. One such format is called Hypertext Markup Language (HTML). HTML is a standard markup language for describing the structure of web pages.

These are some common data formats that are used in many applications including network automation and programmability:

- JavaScript Object Notation (JSON)
- eXtensible Markup Language (XML)
- YAML Ain’t Markup Language (YAML)
# 14.2.3 Data Format Rules
Data formats have rules and structure similar to what we have with programming and written languages. Each data format will have specific characteristics:

- Syntax, which includes the types of brackets used, such as [ ], ( ), { }, the use of white space, or indentation, quotes, commas, and more.
- How objects are represented, such as characters, strings, lists, and arrays.
- How key/value pairs are represented. The key is usually on the left side and it identifies or describes the data. The value on the right is the data itself and can be a character, string, number, list or another type of data.
# 14.2.4 Compare Data Formats
```JSON
{
	"message": "success",
	"timestamp": 1560789260,
	"iss_position": {
		"latitude": "25.9990",
		"longitude": "-132.6992"
	}
}
```

```YAML
message: success
timestamp: 1560789260
iss_position:
    latitude: '25.9990'
    longitude: '-132.6992'
```

```XML
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" ?>
<root>
  <message>success</message>
  <timestamp>1560789260</timestamp>
  <iss_position>
    <latitude>25.9990</latitude>
    <longitude>-132.6992</longitude>
  </iss_position>
</root>
```

# 14.2.6 JSON Syntax Rules
These are some of the characteristics of JSON:

- It uses a hierarchical structure and contains nested values.
- It uses braces { } to hold objects and square brackets [ ] hold arrays.
- Its data is written as key/value pairs.

In JSON, the data known as an object is one or more key/value pairs enclosed in braces { }. The syntax for a JSON object includes:

- Keys must be strings within double quotation marks ” “.
- Values must be a valid JSON data type (string, number, array, Boolean, null, or another object).
- Keys and values are separated by a colon.
- Multiple key/value pairs within an object are separated by commas.
- Whitespace is not significant.

At times a key may contain more than one value. This is known as an array. An array in JSON is an ordered list of values. Characteristics of arrays in JSON include:

- The key followed by a colon and a list of values enclosed in square brackets [ ].
- The array is an ordered list of values.
- The array can contain multiple value types including a string, number, Boolean, object or another array inside the array.
- Each value in the array is separated by a comma.

# 14.2.7 YAML Data Format
YAML is another type of human readable data format used by applications for storing, transferring, and reading data. Some of the characteristic of YAML include:

- It is like JSON and is considered a superset of JSON.
- It has a minimalist format making it easy to both read and write.
- It uses indentation to define its structure, without the use of brackets or commas.

# 14.2.8 XML Data Format

XML is one more type of human readable data format used to store, transfer, and read data by applications. Some of the characteristics of XML include:

- It is like HTML , which is the standardized markup language for creating web pages and web applications.
- It is self-descriptive. It encloses data within a related set of tags: **<tag>data</tag>**
- Unlike HTML, XML uses no predefined tags or document structure.

XML objects are one or more key/value pairs, with the beginning tag used as the name of the key: **<key>value</key>**