# 14.3.2 The API Concept
APIs are found almost everywhere. Amazon Web Services, Facebook, and home automation devices such as thermostats, refrigerators, and wireless lighting systems, all use APIs. They are also used for building programmable network automation.

An API is software that allows other applications to access its data or services. It is a set of rules describing how one application can interact with another, and the instructions to allow the interaction to occur.The user sends an API request to a server asking for specific information and receives an API response in return from the server along with the requested information.

# 14.3.4 Open, Internal, and Partner APIs
- **Open APIs or Public APIs –** These APIs are publicly available and can be used with no restrictions. The International Space Station API is an example of a Public API. Because these APIs are public, many API providers, such as Google Maps, require the user to get a free key, or token, prior to using the API. This is to help control the number of API requests they receive and process. Search the internet for a list of public APIs.
- **Internal or Private APIs –** These are APIs that are used by an organization or company to access data and services for internal use only. An example of an internal API is allowing authorized salespeople access to internal sales data on their mobile devices.
- **Partner APIs –** These are APIs that are used between a company and its business partners or contractors to facilitate business between them. The business partner must have a license or other form of permission to use the API. A travel service using an airline’s API is an example of a partner API.
# 14.3.5 Types of Web Service APIs
|Characteristic|SOAP|REST|XML-RPC|JSON-RPC|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|Data Format|XML|JSON, XML, YAML, and others|XML|JSON|
|First released|1998|2000|1998|2005|
|Strengths|Well-established|Flexible formatting and most widely used|Well-established, simplicity|Simplicity|