# 12.2.2 Firewalls
A firewall is a system, or group of systems, that enforces an access control policy between networks.
**Common Firewall Properties**
- Firewalls are resistant to network attacks.
- Firewalls are the only transit point between internal corporate networks and external networks because all traffic flows through the firewall.
- Firewalls enforce the access control policy.
**Firewall Benefits**
- They prevent the exposure of sensitive hosts, resources, and applications to untrusted users.
- They sanitize protocol flow, which prevents the exploitation of protocol flaws.
- They block malicious data from servers and clients.
- They reduce security management complexity by off-loading most of the network access control to a few firewalls in the network.
**Limitations**

- A misconfigured firewall can have serious consequences for the network, such as becoming a single point of failure.
- The data from many applications cannot be passed over firewalls securely.
- Users might proactively search for ways around the firewall to receive blocked material, which exposes the network to potential attack.
- Network performance can slow down.
- Unauthorized traffic can be tunneled or hidden as legitimate traffic through the firewall.
# Firewall Type Descriptions
**Packet Filtering (Stateless) Firewall**
Packet filtering firewalls are usually part of a router firewall, which permits or denies traffic based on Layer 3 and Layer 4 information. They are stateless firewalls that use a simple policy table look-up that filters traffic based on specific criteria.

**Stateful Firewall**
Stateful firewalls are the most versatile and the most common firewall technologies in use. Stateful firewalls provide stateful packet filtering by using connection information maintained in a state table. Stateful filtering is a firewall architecture that is classified at the network layer. It also analyzes traffic at OSI Layer 4 and Layer 5.

**Application Gateway Firewall**
An application gateway firewall (proxy firewall), as shown in the figure, filters information at Layers 3, 4, 5, and 7 of the OSI reference model. Most of the firewall control and filtering is done in software. When a client needs to access a remote server, it connects to a proxy server. The proxy server connects to the remote server on behalf of the client. Therefore, the server only sees a connection from the proxy server.

**Next Gen Firewall**
Next-generation firewalls (NGFW) go beyond stateful firewalls by providing:
- Integrated intrusion prevention.
- Application awareness and control to see and block risky apps.
- Upgrade paths to include future information feeds.
- Techniques to address evolving security threats.

Other methods of implementing firewalls include:
- Host-based (server and personal) firewall - A PC or server with firewall software running on it.
- Transparent firewall - Filters IP traffic between a pair of bridged interfaces.
- Hybrid firewall - A combination of the various firewall types. For example, an application inspection firewall combines a stateful firewall with an application gateway firewall.

# 12.2.5 Intrusion Prevention and Detection Devices
A networking architecture paradigm shift is required to defend against fast-moving and evolving attacks. This must include cost-effective detection and prevention systems, such as intrusion detection systems (IDS) or the more scalable intrusion prevention systems (IPS). The network architecture integrates these solutions into the entry and exit points of the network.

When implementing IDS or IPS, it is important to be familiar with the types of systems available, host-based and network-based approaches, the placement of these systems, the role of signature categories, and possible actions that a Cisco IOS router can take when an attack is detected.

IDS and IPS technologies are both deployed as sensors. An IDS or IPS sensor can be in the form of several different devices:

<li>A router configured with Cisco IOS IPS software</li>
<li>A device specifically designed to provide dedicated IDS or IPS services</li>
<li>A network module installed in an adaptive security appliance (ASA), switch, or router</li>

IDS and IPS technologies use signatures to detect patterns in network traffic. A signature is a set of rules that an IDS or IPS uses to detect malicious activity. Signatures can be used to detect severe breaches of security, to detect common network attacks, and to gather information. IDS and IPS technologies can detect atomic signature patterns (single-packet) or composite signature patterns (multi-packet).

# 12.2.6 Advantages and Disadvantages os IDS and IPS

| **Solution** | **Advantages**                                                                                                                                  | **Disadvantages**                                                                                                                                           |
| ------------ | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| **IDS**      | - No Impact on network (latency, jitter)<br>- No Network impact if there is a sensor failure<br>- No network impact if there is sensor overload | - Response action cannot stop trigger packets<br>- Correct tuning required for response actions<br>- More vulnerable to network security evasion techniques |
| **IPS**      | - Stops trigger packets<br>- Can use stream normalization techniques                                                                            | - Sensor issues might affect network traffic<br>- Sensor overloading impacts the network<br>- Some impact on network (latency, jitter)                      |
You can deploy both an IPS and an IDS. Using one of these technologies does not negate the use of the other. In fact, IDS and IPS technologies can complement each other.
For example, an IDS can be implemented to validate IPS operation because the IDS can be configured for deeper packet inspection offline. This allows the IPS to focus on fewer but more critical traffic patterns inline.

# 12.2.7 Types of IPS
**Host-based IPS**
Host-based IPS (HIPS) is software installed on a host to monitor and analyze suspicious activity. A significant advantage of HIPS is that it can monitor and protect operating system and critical system processes that are specific to that host. With detailed knowledge of the operating system, HIPS can monitor abnormal activity and prevent the host from executing commands that do not match typical behavior. This suspicious or malicious behavior might include unauthorized registry updates, changes to the system directory, executing installation programs, and activities that cause buffer overflows. Network traffic can also be monitored to prevent the host from participating in a denial-of-service (DoS) attack or being part of an illicit FTP session.

| **Advantages**                                                                                                                                                                  | **Disadvantages**                                                |
| ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------- |
| - Provides protection specific to a host operating system<br>- Provides operating system and application level protection<br>- Protects the host after the message is decrypted | - Operating system dependent<br>- Must be installed on all hosts |
**Network-based IPS**
A network-based IPS can be implemented using a dedicated or non-dedicated IPS device. Network-based IPS implementations are a critical component of intrusion prevention. There are host-based IDS/IPS solutions, but these must be integrated with a network-based IPS implementation to ensure a robust security architecture.

Sensors detect malicious and unauthorized activity in real time and can take action when required. As shown in the figure, sensors are deployed at designated network points. This enables security managers to monitor network activity while it is occurring, regardless of the location of the attack target.

# 12.2.8 Specialized Security Appliances
**AMP**
Cisco Advanced Malware Protection (AMP) is an enterprise-class advanced malware analysis and protection solution. It provides comprehensive malware protection for organizations before, during, and after an attack:

<li>Before an attack, AMP strengthens defenses and protects against known and emerging threats.</li>
<li>During an attack, AMP identifies and blocks policy-violating file types, exploit attempts, and malicious files from infiltrating the network.</li>
<li>After an attack, or after a file is initially inspected, AMP goes beyond point-in-time detection capabilities and continuously monitors and analyzes all file activity and traffic, regardless of disposition, searching for any indications of malicious behavior. If a file with an unknown or previously deemed “good” disposition starts behaving badly, AMP will detect it and instantly alert security teams with an indication of compromise. It then provides visibility into where the malware originated, what systems were affected, and what the malware is doing.</li>
AMP accesses the collective security intelligence of the Cisco Talos Security Intelligence and Research Group. Talos detects and correlates threats in real time using the largest threat-detection network in the world.

**WSA**
<p>A Cisco Web Security Appliance (WSA) is a secure web gateway that combines leading protections to help organizations address the growing challenges of securing and controlling web traffic. WSA protects the network by automatically blocking risky sites and testing unknown sites before allowing users to access them. WSA provides malware protection, application visibility and control, acceptable use policy controls, insightful reporting and secure mobility.</p>
<p>While WSA protects the network from malware intrusion, it does not provide protection for users who want to connect to the internet directly outside of the protected network, such as at a public Wi-Fi service. In this instance, the user’s PC can be infected with malware which can then spread to other networks and devices. To help protect user PCs from these types of malware infections there is Cisco Cloud Web Security (CWS).</p>
<p>CWS together with WSA provides comprehensive protection against malware and the associated impacts. The Cisco CWS solution enforces secure communication to and from the internet and provides remote workers the same level of security as onsite employees when using a laptop issued by the employer. Cisco CWS incorporates two main functions, web filtering and web security, and both are accompanied by extensive, centralized reporting.</p>
**ESA**
A Cisco Email Security Appliance (ESA)/ Cisco Cloud Email Security helps to mitigate email-based threats. The Cisco ESA defends mission-critical email systems.
The Cisco ESA is constantly updated by real-time feeds from the Cisco Talos, which detects and correlates threats using a worldwide database monitoring system.
These are some of the main features of ESA:

**Global threat intelligence** - Cisco Talos provides a 24-hour view into global traffic activity. It analyzes anomalies, uncovers new threats, and monitors traffic trends.
**Spam blocking** - A multilayered defense combines an outer layer of filtering based on the reputation of the sender and an inner layer of filtering that performs a deep analysis of the message.
**Advanced malware protection** - Includes AMP that takes advantage of the vast cloud security intelligence network of Sourcefire. It delivers protection across the attack continuum before, during, and after an attack.
**Outbound message control** - Controls outbound messages to help ensure that important messages comply with industry standards and are protected in transit.

