# 6.2.1 Configuration Guidelines
- **EtherChannel support** - All Ethernet interfaces must support EtherChannel with no requirement that interfaces be physically contiguous.
- **Speed and duplex** - Configure all interfaces in an EtherChannel to operate at the same speed and in the same duplex mode.
- **VLAN match** - All interfaces in the EtherChannel bundle must be assigned to the same VLAN or be configured as a trunk (shown in the figure).
- **Range of VLANs** - An EtherChannel supports the same allowed range of VLANs on all the interfaces in a trunking EtherChannel. If the allowed range of VLANs is not the same, the interfaces do not form an EtherChannel, even when they are set to **auto** or **desirable** mode.
The port channel can be configured in access mode, trunk mode (most common), or on a routed port.

# 6.2.2 LACP Configuration Example
**Step 1.** Specify the interfaces that compose the EtherChannel group using the **interface range** _interface_ global configuration mode command. The **range** keyword allows you to select several interfaces and configure them all together.

**Step 2.** Create the port channel interface with the **channel-group** _identifier_ **mode active** command in interface range configuration mode. The identifier specifies a channel group number. The **mode active** keywords identify this as an LACP EtherChannel configuration.

**Step 3.** To change Layer 2 settings on the port channel interface, enter port channel interface configuration mode using the **interface port-channel** command, followed by the interface identifier. In the example, S1 is configured with an LACP EtherChannel. The port channel is configured as a trunk interface with the allowed VLANs specified.

```
S1(config)# interface range FastEthernet 0/1 - 2
S1(config-if-range)# shutdown
S1(config-if-range)# channel-group 1 mode active
Creating a port-channel interface Port-channel 1
S1(config-if-range)# no shutdown
S1(config-if-range)# exit
S1(config)# interface port-channel 1
S1(config-if)# switchport mode trunk
S1(config-if)# switchport trunk allowed vlan 1,2,20
```
