# 14.1.1 Two Functions of Router
The primary functions of a router are to determine the best path to forward packets based on the information in its routing table, and to forward packets toward their destination.
# 14.1.3 Best Path Equals Longest Match
What is meant by the router must determine the best path in the routing table?
The best path in the routing table is also known as the longest match. The longest match is a process the router uses to find a match between the destination IP address of the packet and a routing entry in the routing table.

The routing table contains route entries consisting of a prefix (network address) and prefix length. For there to be a match between the destination IP address of a packet and a route in the routing table, a minimum number of far-left bit must match between the IP address of the packet and the route in the routing table.

The prefix length of the route in the routing table is used to determine the minimum member of far-left bits that must match.

Remember that an IP packet only contains the destination IP address and not the prefix length.

The longest match is the route in the routing table that has the **greatest number of far-left matching bits with the destination IP address of the packet.** The route with the greatest number of equivalent far-left bits or the longest match, is always the preferred route.

**Note**: The term prefix length will be used to refer to the network portion of both IPv4 and IPv6 addresses.

# 14.1.4 IPv4 Address Longest Match Example
**Destination IPv4 Address**: 172.16.0.10
**Address in Binary**: **10101100.0001000.00000000.00**0011010

| Route Entry | Prefix/Prefix Length | Address in Binary                       |
| ----------- | -------------------- | --------------------------------------- |
| 1           | 172.16.0.0/12        | **10101100.0001**0000.00000000.00001010 |
| 2           | 172.16.0.0/18        | **10101100.00010000.00**000000.00001010 |
| 3           | 172.16.0.0/26        | **10101100.00010000.00000000.00**001010 |

In this example, route 3 will be chosen.
# 14.1.6 Build the Routing Table
**Directly Connected Networks**
Directly connected networks are networks that are configured on the active interfaces of a router. A directly connected network is added to the routing table when an interface is configured with an IP address and subnet mask (prefix length) and is active (up and up).

**Remote Networks**
Remote networks are networks that are not directly connected to the router. Routers learn about remote networks in two ways:
- **Static routers** -Added to the routing table when a route is manually configured.
- **Dynamic routing protocols** - Added to the routing table when routing protocols dynamically learn about the remote network. Dynamic routing protocols include Enhanced Interior Gateway Routing Protocol (EIGRP), Open Shortest Path First (OSPF), as well as several others.

**Default Route**
A default route specifies a next-hop router to use when the routing table does not contain a specific route that matches the destination IP address. The default route can be entered manually as a static route or learned automatically from a dynamic routing protocol.

A default route over IPv4 has a route entry of 0.0.0.0/0 and a default route over IPv6 has a route entry of ::/0. If there are no router with a longer match, more than 0 bits, then the default route is used to forward the packet. The default route is sometimes referred to as a gateway of last resort.