# 14.2.1 Packet Forwarding Decision Process
Now that the router has determined the best path for a packet based on the longest match, it must determine how to encapsulate the packet and forward it out the correct egress interface.
1. The data link frame with an encapsulated IP packet arrives on the ingress interface.
2. The router examines the destination IP address in the packet header and consults its IP routing table.
3. The router finds the longest matching prefix in the routing table.
4. The router encapsulates the packet in a data link frame and forwards it out the egress interface.
5. However, if there is no matching route entry the packet is dropped.

**Forwards the Packet to a Device on a Directly Connected Network**
If the route entry indicates that the egress interface is a directly connected network, this means that the destination IP address of the packet belongs to a device on the directly connected network. Therefore, the packet can be forwarded directly to the destination device.

The encapsulation of the packet process varies based on whether the packet is an IPv4 or IPv6 packet:
- **IPv4 packet** - The router checks its ARP table for the destination IPv4 address and an associated Ethernet MAC address. If there is no match, the router sends an ARP Requests. The destination device will return an ARP reply with its MAC address. The router can now forward the IPv4 packet in an Ethernet frame with the proper destination MAC address.
- **IPv6 packet** - The router checks its neighbor cache for the destination IPv6 address and an associated Ethernet MAC address. If there is no match, the router sends an ICMPv6 Neighbor Solicitation (NS) message. The destination device will return an ICMPv6 Neighbor Advertisement (NA) message with its MAC address. The router can now forward the IPv6 packet in an Ethernet frame with the proper destination MAC address.

**Forwards the Packet to a Next-Hop Router**
If the router entry indicates that the destination IP address is on a remote network, this means the destination IP address of the packet belongs to a device on network that is not directly connected. Therefore, the packet must be forwarded to another router, specifically a next-hop router. The next-hop address is indicated in the route entry.

If the forwarding router and the next-hop router are on an Ethernet network, a similar process (ARP and ICMPv6 Neighbor Discovery) will occur for determining the destination MAC address of the packet. The difference is that the router will search for the IP address of the next-hop router in its ARP table or neighbor cache, instead of the destination IP address of the packet.
**Note:** This process will vary for other types of Layer 2 networks.

**Drops the Packet - No Match in Routing Table**
# 14.2.2 End-to-End Packet Forwarding
The primary responsibility of the packet forwarding function is to encapsulate packets in the appropriate data link frame type for the outgoing interface. For example, the data link frame format for a serial link could be Point-to-Point (PPP) protocol, High-Level Data Link Control (HDLC) protocol, or some other Layer 2 protocol.

# 14.2.3 Packet Forwarding Mechanisms
**Process Switching**
An older packet forwarding mechanism still available for Cisco routers. WHen a packet arrives on an interface, it is forwarded to the control plane where the CPU matches the destination address with an entry in its routing table, and then determines the exit interface and forwards the packet. It is important to understand that the router does this for every packet, even if the destination is the same for stream of packets. This process-switching mechanism is very slow and is rarely implemented in modern networks.

**Fast Switching**
Fast switching is another, older packet forwarding mechanism. Fast switching uses a fast-switching cache to store next-hop information. When a packet arrives on an interface, it is forwarded to the control plane where the CPU searches for a match in the fast-switching cache. If it is not there, it is process-switched. The flow information for the packet is also stored in the fast-switching cache. If another packet going to the same destination arrives on an interface, the next-hop information in the cache is re-used without CPU intervention.

**Cisco Express Forwarding (CEF)**
CEF is most recent and default Cisco IOS packet-forwarding mechanism. Like fast switching, CEF builds a Forwarding Information Base (FIB), and an adjacency table. However, the table entries are not packet-triggered like fast switching but change-triggered, such as when something changes in the network topology. Therefore, when a network has converged, the FIB and adjacency tables contain all the information that a router would have to consider when forwarding a packet. Cisco Express Forwarding is the fastest forwarding mechanism and the default on Cisco routers and multilayer switches. Cisco Express Forwarding is the fastest forwarding mechanism and the default on Cisco routers and multilayer switches.
