# 14.5.1 Static and Dynamic Routing
**Static Routes**
Static routes are commonly used in the following in the following scenarios:
- As a default route forwarding packets to a service provider.
- For routes outside the routing domain and not learned by the dynamic routing protocol.
- When the network administrator wants to explicitly define the path for a specific network.
- For routing between stub networks.
Useful for smaller networks. Provide security in larger networks for certain types of traffic, or links to other networks.

**Dynamic Routing Protocols**
Dynamic routing protocols help the network administrator manage the time-consuming and exacting process of configuring and maintaining static routes.
- In networks consisting of more than just a few routers.
- When a change in the network topology requires the network to automatically determine another path.
- For scalability. As the network grows, the dynamic routing protocol automatically learns about any new network.
# 14.5.2 Dynamic Routing Evolution
Dynamic routing protocols have been used in networks since the late 1980s. One of the first routing protocol was RIPv1 released in 1988.

To address the needs of larger networks: OSPF and Intermediate System-To-Intermediate System (IS-IS). Cisco developed the Interior Gateway Routing Protocol (IGRP), which was later replaced by Enhanced IGRP (EIGRP).

Additionally the need to connect different routing domains of different organization and provide routing between them. The Border Gateway Protocol (BGP), the successor of Exterior Gateway Protocol (EGP) is used between ISPs



<table>
  <tr>
    <th> </th>
    <th colspan ="4">Interior Gateway Protcols</th>
    <th>External Gateway Protocols</th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <th> </th>
    <th colspan ="2">Distance Vector</th>
    <th colspan ="2">Link-State</th>
    <th>Path Vector</th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <th>IPv4 </th>
    <td>RIPv2</td>
    <td>EIGRP</td>
	<td>OSPFv2</td>
	<td>IS-IS</td>
	<td>BGP-4</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
	  <th>IPv6</th>
	  <td>RIPng</td>
	  <td>EIGRP for IPv6</td>
	  <td>OSPFv3</td>
	  <td>IS-IS for IPv6</td>
	  <td>BGP-MP</td>
  </tr>
</table>
# 14.5.3 Dynamic Routing Protocol

The purpose of dynamic routing protocols includes the following:
- Discovery of remote networks
- Maintaining the up-to-date routing information
- Choosing the best path to destination networks
- Ability to find a new best path if the current path is no longer available
The main components of dynamic routing protocols include the following:
- **Data structures** - Routing protocols typically use tables or databases for their operations. This information is kept in RAM.
- **Routing protocol messages** - Routing protocols use various types of messages to discover neighboring routers, exchange routing information, and other tasks to learn and maintain accurate information about the network.
- **Algorithm** - An algorithm is a finite list of steps used to accomplish for facilitating routing information and for the best path determination.
Routing protocols allow routers to dynamically share information about remote networks and automatically offer this information to their own routing tables.

# 14.5.4 Best Path
The best path is selected by a routing protocol based on the value or metric it uses to determine the distance to reach a network.

| Routing Protocol                                  | Metric                                                                                                                                             |
| ------------------------------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Routing Information Protocol (RIP)                | "hop count". Each router along a path add as a hop to the hop count with a max of 15 hops.                                                         |
| Open Shortest Path First (OSPF)                   | "cost", which is the based on the cumulative bandwidth from source to destination. Faster links are assigned lower costs compared to slower links. |
| Enhance Interior Gateway Routing Protocol (EIGRP) | It calculates a metric based on the slowest bandwidth and delay values, it could also include load and reliability into the metric calculation.    |
# 14.5.5 Load Balancing
When a router has two or more paths to a destination with equal cost metrics, then the router forwards the packets using both paths equally. This is called **equal cost load balancing**.

Equal cost load balancing is implemented automatically by dynamic routing protocols. Only EIGRP supports unequal cost load balancing.
