# 1.1.1 Switch Boot Sequence
Before configuring a switch, it has to boot. The boot go through a five-step sequence:
1. The switch loads a power-on-self-test (POST) program stored in ROM. POST tests CPU, DRAM, and flash.
2. The switch loads the boot loader stored in ROM.
3. The boot loader performs low-level CPU initialization, such as registers, maps memory and its speed.
4. The boot loader initializes the flash file system.
5. Finally, the boot loader locates the IOS software image into memory, and gives control of the switch over to the IOS.
# 1.1.2 The boot system Command
The switch attempts to boot by using information in the BOOT environment variable. If not set, the switch load and execute the first executable file it can find.

The startup-config file is called `config.text` and is located in flash.

To set the BOOT variable, we use the command `boot system` followed by the path of the executable.

``` Cisco IOS
S1(config)# boot system flash:/c2960-lanbasek9-mz.150-2.SE/c2960-lanbasek9-mz.150-2.SE.bin
```

# 1.1.3 Switch LED Indicators
Cisco catalyst switches have several status LED indicators.
1. **SYST**: The system LED, shows whether the system is receiving power and is functioning properly.
	- Green: Normal operation.
	- Amber: Power but not functional.
	- No LED: No power.
2. **RPS**: Redundant Power System.
	- Green: RPS is connected and ready.
	- Blinking Green: RPS is connected but unavailable.
	- Amber: RPS is in standby mode, or in a fault condition.
	- Blinking Amber: Internal power supply of the switch has failed, and RPS is providing power.
3. **STAT**: Port status mode.
	- No LED: No link, or port was administratively shut down.
	- Green: Link is present.
	- Blinking Green: Activity on port, sending or receiving data.
	- Green-Amber: Link fault.
	- Amber: Port is blocked to ensure that a loop does not exist (typically for 30 seconds after start).
	- Blinking Amber: Port is blocked.
4. **DUPLX**: Port duplex mode.
	- Off: Port is in Half-duplex mode.
	- Green: Port is in Full-duplex mode.
5. **SPEED**: Port speed mode.
	- Off: 10 Mbps.
	- Green: 100 Mbps.
	- Blinking Green: 1000 Mbps.
6. **PoE**: Power Over Ethernet.
	- Off: No PoE.
	- Blinking Amber: PoE mode is not selected, but at least one of the ports has been denined power or has a PoE fault.
	- Green: PoE selected and Port LED will change depending on operation:
		- Green Port: PoE is On.
		- Green-Amber Port: Denied because power capacity.
		- Blinking Amber Port: PoE is off because of a fault.
		- Amber Port: PoE has been disabled for that port.

# 1.1.4 Recovering from a System Crash
The boot loader has a command-line that provides access to the files stored in flash memory.

1. Connect a PC by console cable to the switch console port. 
2. Unplug the switch power cord.
3. Reconnect the power cord to the switch and, within 14 seconds, press and hold down the **Mode** button while the System LED is still flashing green.
4. Continue pressing the **Mode** button until the system LED turn briefly amber and then solid green; then release the **Mode** button.
5. The boot loader **switch:** prompt appears in the terminal emulation software on the PC.
Type **help** or **?** at the boot loader to view a list of available commands.
To view path of the switch BOOT variable type **set**.
Initialize the flash system using **flash_init**.
After flash initialized, type **dir flash:** to view directories and files in flash.
Enter **BOOT=flash** command to change the BOOT variable, then issue **set** to verify.
Finally type **boot** to load the new IOS.

# 1.1.5 Switch Management Access
To prepare a switch for remote management access, the switch must have a switch virtual interface (SVI) configured with an IPv4 and subnet mark, or IPv6 address and prefix length.

The SVI is a virtual interface, not physical.

# 1.1.6 Switch SVI Configuration Example

### Step 1
**Configure the Management Interface**

From VLAN interface configuration mode, and IPv4 address and subnet is applied to the management SVI of the switch.
**Note:** The switch may need to be configured for IPv6. For example, before you can configure IPv6 addressing on a Cisco Catalyst 2960 running IOS version 15.0, you will need to enter the global configuration command **sdm prefer dual-ipv4-and-ipv6 default** and then **reload** the switch.

Enter global configuration mode:
```
S1# configure terminal
```

Enter interface configuration mode for the SVI:
```
S1(config)# interface vlan 99
```

Configure the management interface IPv4 address.
```
S1(config-if)# ip address 172.17.99.11 255.255.255.00
```

Configure the management interface IPv6 address.
```
S1(config-if)# ipv6 address 2011:db8:acad:99::11/64
```

Enable the management interface:
```
S1(config-if)# no shutdown
```

Return to the privileged EXEC mode:
```
S1(config-if)# end
```

Save the running config to the startup config.
```
S1# copy running-config startup-config
```

### Step 2
**Configure the Default Gateway**
The switch should be configured with a default gateway if it will be managed remotely from networks that are not directly connected.

**Note:** Because, it will receive its default gateway information from a router advertisement (RA) message, the switch does not require an IPv6 default gateway.

Enter global configuration mode:
```
S1# configure terminal
```

Configure the default gateway for the switch:
```
S1(config)# ip default-gateway 172.17.99.1
```

Return to the privileged EXEC mode and save running config to the startup config:
```
S1(config)# end
S1# copy running-config startup-config
```

### Step 3
**Verify Configuration**
The **show ip interface brief** and **show ipv6 interface brief***** are used for determining the status of both physical and virtual interfaces.


