# 1.2.1 Duplex Communication
Full-duplex communication increases bandwidth efficiency by allowing both ends of a connection to transmit and receive data simultaneously. This is also known as bidirectional communication and it requires microsegmentation. A microsegmented LAN is created when a switch port has only one device connected and is operating in full-duplex mode. There is no collision domain associated with a switch port operating in full-duplex mode.

Unlike full-duplex communication, half-duplex communication is unidirectional. Half-duplex communication creates performance issues because data can flow in only one direction at a time, often resulting in collisions. Half-duplex connections are typically seen in older hardware, such as hubs. Half-duplex hubs have been replaced by switches that use full-duplex communications by default.

# 1.2.2 Configure Switch Ports at the Physical Layer
Use the **duplex** interface configuration mode command to manually specify the duplex mode for a switch port. Use the **speed** interface configuration mode command to manually specify the speed.

Enable global configuration mode, and interface configuration mode:
```
S1# configure terminal
S1(config)# interface FastEthernet 0/1
```

Configure the interface duplex:
```
S1(config-if)# duplex full
```

Configure the interface speed:
```
S1(config-if)# speed 100
```

Return to privileged EXEC mode and save running config to startup config.
```
S1(config-if)# exit
S1# copy running-config startup-config
```
The default setting for both duplex and speed for switch ports on Cisco Catalyst 2960 and 3560 switches is auto. The 10/100/1000 ports operate in either half- or full-duplex mode when they are set to 10 or 100 Mbps and operate only in full-duplex mode when it is set to 1000 Mbps (1 Gbps). Autonegotiation is useful when the speed and duplex settings of the device connecting to the port are unknown or may change.

# 1.2.3 Auto-MDIX
Switch-to-switch or switch-to-router connections required using different Ethernet cables. Using the automatic medium-dependent interface crossover (auto-MDIX) feature on an interface eliminates this problem. When auto-MDIX is enabled, the interface automatically detects the required cable connection type (straight-through or crossover) and configures the connection appropriately. When connecting to switches without the auto-MDIX feature, straight-through cables must be used to connect to devices such as servers, workstations, or routers. Crossover cables must be used to connect to other switches or repeaters.

The command to enable auto-MDIX is issued in interface configuration mode on the switch as shown:
```
S1(config-if)# mdix auto
```
To examine the auto-MDIX setting for a specific interface, use the **show controllers ethernet-controller** command with the **phy** keyword. To limit the output to lines referencing auto-MDIX, use the **include MDIX** filter. As shown the output indicates On or Off for the feature.

```
S1# show controllers ethernet-controller fa0/1 phy | include MDIX Auto-MDIX           :  On   [AdminState=1   Flags=0x00052248]
```

# 1.2.4 Switch Verification Commands
Display interface status and configuration:
```
S1# show interfaces [interface-id]
```

Display current startup configuration:
```
S1# show startup-config
```

Display current running configuration:
```
S1# show running-config
```

Display information about flash file system:
```
S1# show flash
```

Display system hardware and software status:
```
S1# show version
```

Displays history of command entered:
```
S1# show history
```

Display IP information about and interface:
```
S1# show [ip/ipv6] interface [interface-id]
```

Display the MAC address table:
```
S1# show mac address-table
S1# show mac-address-table
```
# 1.2.5  Verify Switch Port Configuration
The **show running-config** command can be used to verify that the switch has been correctly configured.
The **show interfaces** command is another commonly used command, which displays status and statistics information on the network interfaces of the switch. The **show interfaces** command is frequently used when configuring and monitoring network devices.

# 1.2.6 Network Access Layer Issues
Based on the output of the **show interfaces** command, possible problems can be fixed as follows:

- If the interface is up and the line protocol is down, a problem exists. There could be an encapsulation type mismatch, the interface on the other end could be error-disabled, or there could be a hardware problem.
- If the line protocol and the interface are both down, a cable is not attached, or some other interface problem exists. For example, in a back-to-back connection, the other end of the connection may be administratively down.
- If the interface is administratively down, it has been manually disabled (the **shutdown** command has been issued) in the active configuration.

Some media errors are not severe enough to cause the circuit to fail but do cause network performance issues. The table explains some of these common errors which can be detected using the **show interfaces** command.


| Error Type      | Description                                                                                                                                                                      |
| --------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Input Errors    | Total number of errors. It includes runts, giants, no buffer, CRC, frame, overrun, and ignored counts.                                                                           |
| Runts           | Frames that are discarded because they are smaller than the minimum frame size for the medium. For instance, any Ethernet frame that is less than 64 bytes is considered a runt. |
| Giants          | Frames that are discarded because they exceed the maximum frame size for the medium. For example, any Ethernet frame that is grater than 1518 bytes is considered a giant.       |
| CRC             | CRC errors are generated when the calculated checksum is not the same as the checksum received                                                                                   |
| Output Errors   | Sum of all errors that prevented the final transmission of datagrams out of the interface that is being examined.                                                                |
| Collisions      | Number os messages retrasmitted beacause of an Ethernet collision.                                                                                                               |
| Late Collisions | A collision that occurs after 512 bits of the frame have been transmitted.                                                                                                       |
# 1.2.7 Interface Input and Output Errors
“Input errors” is the sum of all errors in datagrams that were received on the interface being examined. This includes runts, giants, CRC, no buffer, frame, overrun, and ignored counts. The reported input errors from the **show interfaces** command include the following:

- **Runt Frames** - Ethernet frames that are shorter than the 64-byte minimum allowed length are called runts. Malfunctioning NICs are the usual cause of excessive runt frames, but they can also be caused by collisions.
- **Giants** - Ethernet frames that are larger than the maximum allowed size are called giants.
- **CRC errors** - On Ethernet and serial interfaces, CRC errors usually indicate a media or cable error. Common causes include electrical interference, loose or damaged connections, or incorrect cabling. If you see many CRC errors, there is too much noise on the link and you should inspect the cable. You should also search for and eliminate noise sources.

“Output errors” is the sum of all errors that prevented the final transmission of datagrams out the interface that is being examined. The reported output errors from the **show interfaces** command include the following:

- **Collisions** - Collisions in half-duplex operations are normal. However, you should never see collisions on an interface configured for full-duplex communication.
- **Late collisions** - A late collision refers to a collision that occurs after 512 bits of the frame have been transmitted. Excessive cable lengths are the most common cause of late collisions. Another common cause is duplex misconfiguration. For example, you could have one end of a connection configured for full-duplex and the other for half-duplex. You would see late collisions on the interface that is configured for half-duplex. In that case, you must configure the same duplex setting on both ends. A properly designed and configured network should never have late collisions.
# 1.2.8 Troubleshooting Network Access Layer Issues
Use the **show interfaces** command to check the interface status.

If the interface is down:

- Check to make sure that the proper cables are being used. Additionally, check the cable and connectors for damage. If a bad or incorrect cable is suspected, replace the cable.
- If the interface is still down, the problem may be due to a mismatch in speed setting. The speed of an interface is typically autonegotiated; therefore, even if it is manually applied to one interface, the connecting interface should autonegotiate accordingly. If a speed mismatch does occur through misconfiguration, or a hardware or software issue, then that may result in the interface going down. Manually set the same speed on both connection ends if a problem is suspected.

If the interface is up, but issues with connectivity are still present:

- Using the **show interfaces** command, check for indications of excessive noise. Indications may include an increase in the counters for runts, giants, and CRC errors. If there is excessive noise, first find and remove the source of the noise, if possible. Also, verify that the cable does not exceed the maximum cable length and check the type of cable that is used.
- If noise is not an issue, check for excessive collisions. If there are collisions or late collisions, verify the duplex settings on both ends of the connection. Much like the speed setting, the duplex setting is usually autonegotiated. If there does appear to be a duplex mismatch, manually set the duplex to full on both ends of the connection.
