# 1.3.1 Telnet Operation
Telnet uses TCP port 23. It is an older protocol that uses unsecure plaintext transmission of both the login authentication (username and password) and the data transmitted between the communicating devices. A threat actor can monitor packets using Wireshark.
# 1.3.2 SSH Operation
Secure Shell (SSH) is a secure protocol that uses TCP port 22. It provides a secure (encrypted) management connection to a remote device. SSH should replace Telnet for management connections. SSH provides security for remote connections by providing strong encryption when a device is authenticated (username and password) and also for the transmitted data between the communicating devices.

# 1.3.3 Verify the Switch Supports SSH
Use **show version** command on the switch to see which IOS the switch is currently running. An IOS filename that includes the combination "k9" supports cryptographic features and capabilities.

# 1.3.4 Configure SSH
### Step 1
**Verify SSH Support**
Use the **show ip ssh** command to verify that the switch supports SSH. If the switch is not running an IOS that supports cryptographic features, this command is unrecognized.
```
S1# show ip ssh
```

### Step 2
**Configure the IP domain**
```
S1(config)# ip domain-name <name>
```

### Step 3 
**Generate RSA key pairs**
SSH version 1 has known security flaws. To configure SSH version 2, issue the **ip ssh version 2**
```
S1(config)# crypto key generate rsa
```
**Note:** To delete the RSA key pair, use the **crypto key zeroize rsa** global configuration mode

### Step 4
**Configure user authentication.**
Create a username and password pair using the **username** _username_ **secret** _password_ global configuration mode command.
```
S1(config)# username admin secret ccna
```
### Step 5
**Configure the vty lines**
```
S1(config)# line vty 0 15
S1(config-line)# transport input ssh
S1(config-line)# login local
S1(config-line)# exit
```

### Step 6
**Enable SSH version 2**
```
S1(config)# ip ssh version 2
```

# 1.3.5 Verify SSH is Operational
```

S1# show ip ssh
SSH Enabled - version 2.0
Authentication timeout: 120 secs; Authentication retries: 3
To check the SSH connections to the device, use the show ssh command as shown.
S1# show ssh
%No SSHv1 server connections running.
Connection Version Mode Encryption  Hmac                State          Username
0          2.0     IN   aes256-cbc  hmac-sha1    Session started       admin
0          2.0     OUT  aes256-cbc  hmac-sha1    Session started       admin
S1#
```