# 1.5.1 Interface Verification Commands
There are several **show** commands that can be used to verify the operation and configuration of an interface.
The following commands are especially useful to quickly identify the status of an interface:

- **show ip interface brief** and **show ipv6 interface brief** - These display a summary for all interfaces including the IPv4 or IPv6 address of the interface and current operational status.
- **show running-config interface** _interface-id_ - This displays the commands applied to the specified interface.
- **show ip route** and **show ipv6 route** - These display the contents of the IPv4 or IPv6 routing table stored in RAM. In Cisco IOS 15, active interfaces should appear in the routing table with two related entries identified by the code ‘**C**’ (Connected) or ‘**L**’ (Local). In previous IOS versions, only a single entry with the code ‘**C**’ will appear.
# 1.5.2 Verify Interface Status
The output of the **show ip interface brief** and **show ipv6 interface brief** commands can be used to quickly reveal the status of all interfaces on the router.
# 1.5.3 Verify IPv6 Link Local and Multicast Addresses
The output of the **show ipv6 interface brief** command displays two configured IPv6 addresses per interface. One address is the IPv6 global unicast address that was manually entered. The other address, which begins with FE80, is the link-local unicast address for the interface. A link-local address is automatically added to an interface whenever a global unicast address is assigned. An IPv6 network interface is required to have a link-local address, but not necessarily a global unicast address.

The **show ipv6 interface gigabitethernet 0/0/0 c**ommand displays the interface status and all of the IPv6 addresses belonging to the interface. Along with the link local address and global unicast address, the output includes the multicast addresses assigned to the interface, beginning with prefix FF02.
# 1.5.4 Verify Interface Configuration
The output of the **show running-config interface** command displays the current commands applied to the specified interface.

The following two commands are used to gather more detailed interface information:

- **show interfaces** - Displays interface information and packet flow count for all interfaces on the device.
- **show ip interface** and **show ipv6 interface** - Displays the IPv4 and IPv6 related information for all interfaces on a router.
# 1.5.5 Verify Routes
Using *show ip route* and *show ipv6 route* we can reveal the directly connected network entries.
A 'C' next to a route  indicates that this is a directly connected network.

# 1.5.6 Filter Show Command Output
There are four filtering parameters that can be used after the pipe.
**section**
Shows the entire section that starts with the filtering expression.
```
R1# show running-config | section line vty
```

**include**
Includes all output lines that match the filtering expression.
```
R1# show ip interface brief | include up
```

**exclude**
Excludes all output lines that match the filtering expression.
```
R1# show ip interface brief | exclude unassigned
```

**begin**
Shows all the output lines from a certain point, starting with the line that matches the filtering expression.
```
R1# show ip route | begin Gateway
```

# 1.5.8 Command History Feature
To recall commands in the history buffer, press **Ctrl**+**P** or the **Up Arrow** key.
To return to more recent commands in the history buffer, press **Ctrl**+**N** or the **Down Arrow** key.
Use the **show history** privileged EXEC command to display the contents of the buffer.
Use the **terminal history size** user EXEC command to increase or decrease the size of the buffer.

Use **show history** to display recently used commands.