# 16.2.1 IP Vulnerabilities
|IP Attacks|Description|
|---|---|
|**ICMP attacks**|Threat actors use Internet Control Message Protocol (ICMP) echo packets (pings) to discover subnets and hosts on a protected network, to generate DoS flood attacks, and to alter host routing tables.|
|**Denial-of-Service (DoS) attacks**|Threat actors attempt to prevent legitimate users from accessing information or services.|
|**Distributed Denial-of-Service (DDoS) attacks**|Similar to a DoS attack, but features a simultaneous, coordinated attack from multiple source machines.|
|**Address spoofing attacks**|Threat actors spoof the source IP address in an attempt to perform blind spoofing or non-blind spoofing.|
|**Man-in-the-middle attack (MiTM)**|Threat actors position themselves between a source and destination to transparently monitor, capture, and control the communication. They could simply eavesdrop by inspecting captured packets or alter packets and forward them to their original destination.|
|**Session hijacking**|Threat actors gain access to the physical network, and then use an MiTM attack to hijack a session.|
# 16.2.2 ICMP Attacks
ICMP was developed to carry diagnostic messages and to report error conditions when routes, hosts, and ports are unavailable. ICMP messages are generated by devices when a network error or outage occurs. The ping command is a user-generated ICMP message, called an echo request, that is used to verify connectivity to a destination.

Threat actors use ICMP for reconnaissance and scanning attacks. This enables them to launch information-gathering attacks to map out a network topology, discover which hosts are active (reachable), identify the host operating system (OS fingerprinting), and determine the state of a firewall.

| ICMP Message                         | Description                                                                                                        |
| ------------------------------------ | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| **ICMP echo request and echo reply** | This is used to perform host verification and DoS attacks.                                                         |
| **ICMP unreachable**                 | This is used to perform network reconnaissance and scanning attacks.                                               |
| **ICMP mask reply**                  | This is used to map an internal IP network.                                                                        |
| **ICMP redirects**                   | This is used to lure a target host into sending all traffic through a compromised device and create a MiTM attack. |
| **ICMP router discovery**            | This is used to inject bogus route entries into the routing table of a target host.                                |
Networks should have strict ICMP access control list (ACL) filtering on the network edge to avoid ICMP probing from the internet. Security analysts should be able to detect ICMP-related attacks by looking at captured traffic and log files. In the case of large networks, security devices, such as firewalls and intrusion detection systems (IDS), should detect such attacks and generate alerts to the security analysts.
# 16.2.4 Amplification and Reflection Attacks
- **Amplification** – The threat actor forwards ICMP echo request messages to many hosts. These messages contain the source IP address of the victim.
- **Reflection** – These hosts all reply to the spoofed IP address of the victim to overwhelm it.

Note: Newer forms of amplification and reflection attacks such as DNS-based reflection and amplification attacks and Network Time Protocol (NTP) amplification attacks are now being used.

Threat actors also use resource exhaustion attacks. These attacks consume the resources of a target host to either to crash it or to consume the resources of a network.
# 16.2.5 Address Spoofing Attacks
Spoofing attacks can be non-blind or blind:

- **Non-blind spoofing** – The threat actor can see the traffic that is being sent between the host and the target. The threat actor uses non-blind spoofing to inspect the reply packet from the target victim. Non-blind spoofing determines the state of a firewall and sequence-number prediction. It can also hijack an authorized session.
- **Blind spoofing** – The threat actor cannot see the traffic that is being sent between the host and the target. Blind spoofing is used in DoS attacks.

MAC address spoofing attacks are used when threat actors have access to the internal network. Threat actors alter the MAC address of their host to match another known MAC address of a target host, as shown in the figure. The attacking host then sends a frame throughout the network with the newly-configured MAC address. When the switch receives the frame, it examines the source MAC address.
#### Threat Actor Spoofs a Server’s MAC Address
The switch overwrites the current CAM table entry and assigns the MAC address to the new port, as shown in the figure. It then forwards frames destined for the target host to the attacking host.

#### Switch Updates CAM Table with Spoofed Address
Application or service spoofing is another spoofing example. A threat actor can connect a rogue DHCP server to create an MiTM condition.